Beamforming Techniques for Large-N Aperture
Arrays
K. Zarb-Adami, A. Faulkner, J.G. Bij de Vaate, G.W. Kant and P.Picard
Abstract—Beamforming is central to the processing function
of all phased arrays and becomes particularly challenging with
a large number of antenna element (e.g. >100,000). The ability
to beamform efﬁciently with reasonable power requirements is
discussed in this paper. Whilst the most appropriate beamforming
technology will change over time due to semiconductor and pro-
cessing developments, we present a hierarchical structure which
is technology agnostic and describe both Radio-Frequency (RF)
and digital hierarchical beamforming approaches. We present
implementations of both RF and digital beamforming systems on
two antenna array demonstrators, namely the Electronic Multi
Beam Radio Astronomy ConcEpt (EMBRACE) and the dual-
polarisation all-digital array (2-PAD). This paper will compare
and contrast both digital and analogue implementations without
considering the deep system design of these arrays.
Index Terms—Phased Arrays, Beamforming, Analogue Beam-
forming, Digital Beamforming.
I. INTRODUCTION
HE purpose of beamforming is to precisely align the
phases of an incoming signal from different parts of an
array to form a well understood beam in a speciﬁc direction.
This is illustrated in Figure 1 for one dimension. Essentially,
the signals from each of the elements are delayed such that
when they are summed they all have the same delay corre-
sponding to a speciﬁc direction. There is a physical geometric
delay on the incoming wavefront that increases linearly across
the array, which is then compensated for electronically prior
to being summed. This approach will work perfectly across
a wide frequency bandwidth if the signals are delayed in
time and then summed (within the limits of the antenna and
receiving system electronics).
The issue with this straightforward concept is that, par-
ticularly for RF/analogue beamforming, a true time delay is
relatively bulky and expensive to implement, typically being
done using extended, switchable signal path lengths often with
lengths of circuit board tracks or cables. These often suffer
from environmental and repeatability issues. The alternative
is to approximate the time delay with phase delays, which
is considerably easier to implement electronically particularly
when many signals are being combined.
Kristian Zarb-Adami is with the Department of Astrophysics, University of
Oxford, email:kza@astro.ox.ac.uk
A. Faulkner is at the University of Cambridge, Cavendish Laboratory,
Cambridge CB3 0HE, UK
J.G. de Vaate and G.W. Kant are at ASTRON, Netherlands
P. Picard is at the Observatoire de Paris at Nancay
Manuscript submitted June 30, 2010
Fig. 1: The Beamforming operation.
A. Time-Delay Beamforming
This is the ideal approach for beamforming since, if it can be
implemented it is inherently wide bandwidth and necessary for
the long delays across the array. However, the implementation
is complicated in the analogue domain and few phase steps
will limit resolution, which will also introduce errors in the
ﬁnal beam. Furthermore, to implement multiple beams with
an analogue implementation simply multiplies the amount of
hardware required for every beam, resulting a complex system.
In the digital domain, after digitizing the signal, it is
relatively simple to introduce delays which are a multiple of
the sample time and simply buffer the signals from elements
which require a delay. Higher time resolution, however, is
required than just the sample time. This can be achieved
by interpolating between two or more samples, the effects
of which need a more sound theoretical analysis. There is
some complexity involved but it is eminently achievable, even
for multiple beams given enough processing power. There are
questions on the accuracy of the interpolation techniques and
what effects that will have on the performance of the array
which are described in detail in Alexander et al. [7].
B. Phase Shift Beamforming
Time delays can be introduced by using phase shifting
systems in a narrow frequency range. This is easier to do in
both the analogue and digital domains. The basic problem with
using phase delays for the time delay element is that it makes
the delay frequency dependant, so the time delay at the top of
the band is shorter than the time delay at the bottom of the
band, hence the time delay will only be accurate in the centre
arXiv:1008.4047v1  [astro-ph.IM]  24 Aug 2010

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Fig. 2: A Hierarchical beamforming scheme showing how
antennas are grouped into ‘tiles’ and then ‘stations’
of the band. The bandwidth is therefore limited by the errors
that can be sustained at the edges of the band. This effect
can be mitigated by processing multiple narrower bands to
make up the overall bandwidth required. To introduce multiple
bands in RF beamforming is expensive; in effect it is necessary
to have the repeat the same amount of electronics for each
additional beam. Hence, an analogue system tries to maximize
the fractional beamwidth for best use of the electronics.
In a digital system the bandwidth issue can be solved by
splitting the bandwidth into arbitrarily many narrow bands and
then phase shifting each band for the time delay required.
This is expensive computationally since each input stream
needs to be put through an FFT or polyphase ﬁlter process.
Phase shifting is then a straightforward complex multiplication
function on each of the sub-bands. The sub-bands can be
made narrow enough to make any errors negligible. There
are important other beneﬁts when the signal is split into many
narrow bands: Interference ﬁltering of narrow frequency spikes
can be eliminated early in the signal chain by attenuating the
relevant sub-bands; maybe more importantly for phased arrays
with a large fractional bandwidth is the ability to accurately
calibrate the band pass characteristics of the analogue signal
chain from the element into the digitizer. This should reduce
the cost of implementation of the analogue gain chain.
II. HIERARCHICAL BEAMFORMING
In order to beamform a large number of antennas the
beamforming design needs to have a hierarchical structure due
to the processing and the data-transport overhead. However,
as with most reduction techniques there will be a level of
compromise involved. By processing elements in groups (the
size of which is determined by either the processing or the
communications requirements), as ‘tiles’, limited numbers of
tile beams are used to create a larger number of ‘station’
beams. This structure shown in ﬁgure 2 leads to errors in the
beamforming which could increase the further off-centre from
a tile beam it is. The way these errors manifest themselves is
shown in ﬁgure 3 and described in more detail in [7].
III. RF BEAMFORMING
As has been discussed, in a practical implementation of a
large phased array beamforming is a hierarchical process and
different techniques and technologies can be used at different
Fig. 3: Figure showing how hierarchical beamforming can
introduce errors in the pointing direction of ‘tile’ beams.
levels of the hierarchy. The high volume of the beamforming
work is performed at the ‘tile level’ or ﬁrst stage immediately
after the elements. It is generally accepted that ‘station level’
or higher level beamforming after the tiles will need to be in
the digital domain for the required ﬂexibility and ﬁeld-of-view
(FoV).
RF beamforming takes the analogue signals after ampliﬁ-
cation by a low noise ampliﬁer, and implements appropriate
delays through true time delay or phase shifting and then
sums the results to make a beam. Each polarisation of each
beam needs hardware dedicated to the task, although multiple
channels can be implemented in each chip. As can be seen this
is a relatively simple process, but does require careful design
of the analogue electronics to ensure stability. The issues are
that it is a phase shift beamformer operating with a single
frequency channel, which limits available bandwidth and the
resolution of the phase shifter and gain control is limited.
The block diagram of an analogue beamformer chip im-
plemented on the EMBRACE system is shown in Figure 5.
As can be seen it produces two beams from four elements.
Each element for each beam is controlled for phase and
amplitude with a 3-bit control word. The beneﬁt of RF
beamforming currently is that it is relatively cheap and low
power compared to the digitization and processing required
for digital beamforming.
A. EMBRACE Beamforming
EMBRACE is an operational demonstrator developed to
test the next generation radio telescopes. It demonstrates the
possibility of independent, multiple, wide ﬁeld, wide band
receiving antenna beams based on phased array technology
and described in detail in Monari et al. [4]. EMBRACE
operates in the 500–1500 MHz frequency range and consists of
two aperture array stations implemented at Westerbork in the
Netherlands and Nancay in France. Whilst the EMBRACE is
inherently dual-polarisation the current implementation pro-
cesses only one polarisation, with the second one being a
trivial addition of twice as much hardware.
The base element of the EMBRACE arrays is the EM-
BRACE tile shown in ﬁgure 6. Each tile has one control board
with six identical ‘hex-modules’ connecting 72 dual-polarised

--- PAGE BREAK ---

GPS disciplined
clock
EMBRACE Back−End
Towards Correlator
Analogue links
Fibre Optic Data Link
Clock Subsystem
Control Subsystem
Interface
Beam Former+
Digital
Filter bank
A/D Conversion
Receiver
Beam Former Chip
Control
4 elements building block
RF beam former IC
Tile with 6 Hexboards (144 elements)
EMBRACE
multi−beam
tile
Fig. 4: System level overview of the EMBRACE station architecture. Antenna signals are combined at tile level using integrated
circuit technology. Each tile provides two RF beam signals to a local processing facility where digital station beams are formed.
Each tile uses two coaxial cables to transport the RF signals and also supply DC power and control signals to the tiles. This
is reproduced from Kant et al. 1
Fig. 5: The Beamforming chip designed for the EMBRACE
system.
Vivaldi antennas. The tiles are then connected together to form
a station according to the system diagram shown in ﬁgure 4.
B. RF Beam Former Chip
An analogue RF MMIC has been developed, to control the
phases of each element in an EMBRACE tile. To generate
Fig. 6: The EMBRACE Station.
phase shift, the design uses a vector modulator approach, with
a ﬁlter network network generating the four main phase states
0, 90, 180 and 270 degrees. Smaller phase steps can be created
by combining these vectors.
The chip has been designed by OPAR, France in a
QUBIC4G BiCMOS 0.25 µm SiGe process of NXP and shown
in ﬁgure 7 and described in detail in Picard et al. [8]. With this
chip two times four differential channels are independently
phase shifted, summed and ampliﬁed. Amplitude control is
used to compensate for gain variation of the chip and the entire
analogue signal transport chain. The phase settings are set by
a digital serial control interface, to reduce layout complexity
and crosstalk issues.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Fig. 7: The EMBRACE RF-beamforming chip developed by
OPAR. Chip photograph courtesy of P Picard.
IV. DIGITAL BEAMFORMING
With digital beamforming the incoming signal is ﬁrstly
digitized, whether from a single element or the product of
an initial RF beamformer. The signals from each channel
are passed to a processing device for signal processing. This
architecture is capable of very high performance in terms
of bandwidth, precision, number of beams, and usage of the
output data rate. Once the incoming signals are digitized then
all the performance is at the cost of additional processing,
memory and communications capacity.
These parameters follow a growth law, either Moores law
or similar. It is likely therefore, that the role of digital beam-
forming will grow over time eventually becoming cheaper in
terms of power and cost than RF beamforming.
Fig. 8: An outline of a top-level digital beamforming system
diagram
Figure 8 shows an outline of a signal processing system
for the ﬁrst stage of a digital beamformer. As noted, the
ﬁrst requirement is to digitize all the incoming channels.
The system shown in the ﬁgure employs frequency domain
beamforming which confers the maximum ﬂexibility, so the
signals are ﬁrst passed through a polyphase ﬁlter bank, such
that beamforming is then a matter of multiplying each spectral
sample with a coefﬁcient to provide phase rotation and ampli-
tude adjustment, ﬁnally the sample is summed with samples
from other elements to make a beam. This process is repeated
to form as many beams as is required. Corrections can also
be made for polarisation errors at this stage of processing, or
at the tile level.
Time-domain digital beamforming is also possible and can
be used to align signal paths at the sample level. However,
when sub-sample alignment is required, interpolation ﬁlters
need to be designed often adding to the complexity of the
digital design. Arguments for broad-band digital time-domain
beamforming are numerous and indeed valid, however in
the case of the 2-PAD implementation a frequency domain
architecture was selected since polyphase ﬁlter-banks allowed
more control and ﬂexibility on the correction of the analogue
band-pass phase and amplitude characteristics.
A. Beamforming on 2-PAD
The 2-Polarisations All-Digital (2-PAD) project is a phased
aperture array demonstrator built to conﬁrm the feasibility of
beamforming many, tightly-coupled signals with bandwidths
of hundreds of Mega-hertz entirely in the digital domain
and will demonstrate antenna design, RF conditioning and
ampliﬁcation, digitisation, dataﬂow and processing for future
aperture array radio instruments1. The 2-PAD demonstrator
(shown in ﬁgure 9) is a modular, end-to-end demonstrator
system with a modest number of Bunny Ear Comb Antennas
(BECA), described in Zhang et al. [6]. Due to its modular
design, different implementations of subsystems (i.e. antennas,
digitisers or processing systems) are able to be tested within
a working system.
As discussed in the previous section, the broadband signal
from each antenna is digitised using an eight-bit analogue-to-
digital convertor (ADC) and then split into 1024 frequency
bands. Each band is independently processed (delayed and
combined with the signals from other antennas) with a narrow-
band phase-shift beamformer. The results of these narrowband
beamformers are combined to form a broadband beam in the
required spatial direction. This operation is repeated for each
beam that is formed. Channelisation or ‘frequency binning’
of large-bandwidth input signals for beamforming can be
performed with various techniques, but a polyphase ﬁlter bank
with an 8-tap FIR-ﬁlter and 10-stage FFT is implemented.
N single-polarisation antenna signals are digitised then
combined with phase correction factors to form B beams in the
beamformer processor. These beams are combined in a beam-
combiner processor which could also be a further hierarchy of
processors, combining more beams from other tiles.
For the 2-PAD case and in general for most digital beam-
forming systems being implemented, we ﬁnd that rather than
being processing limited we are limited by the I/O bandwidth
and inter-processor bandwidth that is required to transport
the signal from the antenna elements to the beam-forming
processor. As an example in the 2-PAD system, the analogue
input signal ranges from 0.5GHz to 0.7GHz (a bandwidth of
0.2GHz), and is sampled with 8-bits of precision, which results
in a digital input bandwidth from each antenna polarisation of
3.2 Gbps. This means that the ﬁrst-stage beamformer processor
will have a raw input data-rate of N ×3.2 Gbps and an output
1more information is available at www.skads-eu.org

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Fig. 9: The 2-Polarisation All-Digital (2-PAD) aperture array
demonstrator at Jodrell Bank.
Beamformer 
Processor
Beam Combiner
Processor
RF ampliﬁcation 
and signal 
conditioning
Single Antenna 
polarisation
Digitisation
To Station Processors
From other 
Beamformer 
Processors
2B+1
Fig. 10: System Signal Processing Flow for Digital Aperture
Array. Only one polarisation is shown for clarity
data rate of B × s × 3.2 Gbps, where s is the bitwidth scaling
factor of the beamformer.
Note that for slow moving objects, such as astronomical
sources described in Thompson et al. 9, there is a strong dis-
tinction between the high-performance, real-time processing
which must be performed at the input data-rate and the more
computationally complex beam-steering co-efﬁcient calcula-
tion. In the next section, we will concentrate on the former; i.e
an implementation of the high-performance signal processing
system. We allow the steering and correction coefﬁcients to
be updated at a lower rate, dictated by the speed with which
the array must be able to scan the sky.
V. A HIERARCHICAL FREQUENCY DOMAIN
BEAMFORMING ARCHITECTURE
Following from the previous section, we now describe
the design and implementation of an FPGA-based digital
system for the frequency sub-band phase-shift beamforming
Ant1
Ant2
Ant3
Ant4
800MHz
100-
300MHz
PFFB
1024 point
FFT Filter Bank
Accumulation 
length adjustable 
at runtime 
Beamform
power
Calibration System
PFFB
PFFB
PFFB
Fig. 11: An architectural drawing of the 4-element beamformer
and calibration system
architecture.
Figure 11 is an architectural schematic of a 4-element
beamformer digital system. The Analogue to Digital Converter
(ADC) samples the incoming antenna signal at 800MSa/s
with 8 bits of precision. This 400MHz bandwidth signal is
subsequently Digitally Down-Converted (DDC) by mixing
with a complex sinusoid at 3/4 of the ADC clock rate to yield
a base-banded 500MHz to 700MHz input signal.
Channelisation is the next step in the processing pipeline: an
efﬁcient technique is the Polyphase FFT2 Filter Bank (PFFB)
channeliser, which improves frequency isolation of the FFT
operation (see for example 5) and has been shown to be
efﬁcient for large numbers of equally spaced channels 5. The
beamformer applies steering and correction coefﬁcients to each
signal stream and then performs beam summation. We then
accumulate the power sum of the raw voltage beam signal for
a run-time conﬁgurable length of time.
This design has been implemented using the signal process-
ing libraries and hardware designed by the Collaboration for
Astronomy Signal Processing Research (CASPER)3.
The FPGA-based design is based on Xilinx Virtex II Pro
devices which are available on the internet Break-Out-Boards
(iBOB(s)) and the Berkeley Emulation Engine (BEE-2) boards
shown in ﬁgure 12 and 13. Since the FPGAs use ﬁxed
hardware blocks which are natively 18-bit, we preferentially
use 18-bit multiplications and datapaths throughout the design.
A 16-element system based on a hierarchical architectures
shown in ﬁgure 14 has been implemented. Two simultaneous
beams with an instantaneous bandwidth of 200MHz each were
produced. Further information regarding the performance and
calibration of these beams is presented in Armstrong et al. [5].
VI. DISCUSSION
The bulk of the beamforming operation happens in the ﬁrst
stages both in terms of processing and bandwidth, since it is
generally accepted that station level processing will be in a
processor based solution due to the complexity and ﬂexibility
2Fast Fourier Transform (FFT)
3for more information, see www.casper.berkeley.edu

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Fig. 12: A photo of the internet break-out board (iBOB)
designed by CASPER
Fig. 13: A photo of the Berkeley Emulation Engine (BEE-2)
board designed by CASPER
that is required. The question mostly revolves around how
the initial stages of beamforming may be implemented. Here
the consideration is essentially between RF beamforming and
digital beamforming.
Tables I and II summarises the trade-offs between RF and
digital beamforming. It is clear that for signiﬁcant arrays
built in the short term that RF beamforming is an essential
component, however, there are drawbacks in the capability and
scaleability of the system. Digital beamforming through the
whole array will confer substantial beneﬁts and can provide
the performance required by very large arrays but requires
some reasonable and predictable semiconductor advances and
signiﬁcant development costs to implement.
VII. CONCLUSION
The basic conclusion is that beamforming for large phased
arrays is quite difﬁcult to implement at low initial cost and
Fig. 14: An architectural drawing of a 16-element hierarchical
beamformer
in the short term, however, the application of signiﬁcant
development funds and the evolution of semiconductor tech-
nology makes the system not only feasible but economic. The
discussion on the use analogue beamforming for the initial
stages of the system compared to a complete system based on
digital beamforming is going through a transition period. In
the next ten years or so, for the frequencies in question here, a
fully digital system will not only be much higher performance
but also lower cost and power. This will only improve as
longer term developments take place. The management of this
period and the demonstration of performance using analogue
techniques will be the challenge until then.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Many people have contributed towards this review and
the authors would especially like to thank Professor Mike
Jones, Dr Paul Alexander, Professor Arnold van Ardenne,
OPAR for very many discussions that led to the design and
implemenation of the EMBRACE and 2-PAD systems.
This effort/activity is supported by the European Commu-
nity Framework Programme 6, Square Kilometre Array Design
Studies (SKADS), contract no 011938.
REFERENCES
[1] Kant, G.W., van der Wal, E., Ruiter, M., Benthem, P., “EMBRACE
System Design and Realisation,”
[2] Garcia-Perez, “FIDA3: A Novel Active Array for the Mid-SKA,”
[3] Balluch, M. 1988, A&A, 200, 58
[4] Monari J., Perini F., Mariotti S., Kant G.W., Morawietz J., van der Wal,
E. 2009, SKADS Conference Proceedings, Limelette
[5] Armstrong R., Hickish J., Zarb Adami K., Jones M.E, 2009, SKADS
Conference Proceedings, Limelette
[6] Zhang Y., Brown A.K., 2009, SKADS Conference Proceedings, Limelette
[7] Alexander P., Bregman J.A., Faulkner A. 2009, SKADS Conference
Proceedings, Limelette
[8] Picard P., Renaud P., Taffourau C., Macaire V., Mercier L., Paule, W.
2009, SKADS Conference Proceedings, Limelette
[9] Thompson, A. R., Moran, J. M. & Swenson, G. W. 1985, Interferometry
and Synthesis in Radio Astronomy (John Wiley & Sons, New York)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

TABLE I: RF and digital beamforming comparison
Characteristic
RF Beamforming
Digital Beamforming
Implementation
Integrated into analogue chips with control interface. The inputs are
multiple low level analogue signals, the devices may be mounted
near to the LNAs. Each chip produces multiple beams from each
block of input channels.
Each analogue signal needs to be ampliﬁed to levels acceptable to
an ADC; these are digitized and passed to a processing device(s).
The signals are split into multiple channels and beamformed in
narrow channels.
Beam Generation
Each beam is formed by phase shifting each input to provide the
required delay and then summed for each chip. The amplitude may
be adjusted for each input element independently. It is probably
not practical to correct polarisation at the element level. True time
delay technology integrated onto chips is not currently proven,
external delays become to large for practical implementation on
a dense high frequency array. RF beamforming chips may be
cascaded for larger systems. Each beam operates as a single
frequency channel. This will restrict the number of tile beams that
may be produced independently.
With the anticipated frequency domain beam forming, the beams
are produced by phase shifting a narrow frequency band. Each
channel may be calibrated for amplitude, or used for RFI excision.
Polarisation may be corrected as a function of frequency. Each
channel may be considered to be a sub-beam which can be used
to construct beams with the required bandwidths. Further beams
may be produced by repeating the beamforming functions after
spectral separation. The output data rate determines the overall
performance of the beamformer, assuming that there is sufﬁcient
processing available to produce the beams.
Multiple Beams
Each Tile beam needs to be produced via speciﬁc hardware within
the beamformer chip. The conﬁguration is ﬁxed by the architecture
design.
As discussed above the beams are made up of multiple sub-beams
from speciﬁc frequency dependant coefﬁcients. These can make
up beams in any format required within the constraints of output
data rates and processing.
Bandwidth
Assuming that the beamformer is using phase shifting for time
delays, or a frequency dependent time delay then the bandwidth
will be restricted to some fraction of the operating frequency for
each beam. Wider bandwidths can be constructed using multiple
beams. If true time delay can be produced then wider bandwidths
up to the operational range of the elements and analogue system
can be produced.
The digital system can operate over the full bandwidth available
from the elements and analogue conditioning. This is because each
of the sub-beams can be treated as a narrow independent beam.
Bandpass Corrections
The bandpass corrections for each element need to be made in an
overall fashion. It is unlikely that they can be adjusted for changing
conditions. The corrections made will be identical for each beam.
The analogue system up to the ADC has to be ﬂat enough for
effective digitization to take place. Additional ﬂexibility can be
achieved through further digitisation resolution although this has
cost and power implications. The bandpass can be corrected as a
function of frequency and if necessary by beam; each sub-band
can be independently changed.
Calibration
The analogue beamformer can provide element level amplitude
and approximate time delay calibration; neither of these are as a
function of frequency. It is unlikely to be able to provide element
level polarisation calibration since this is highly frequency and
direction dependant.
The digital system can provide frequency and direction dependant
calibration per beam. The calibration can be high resolution
amplitude, phase and polarisation corrections for each sub-beam.
Since many beams can be formed it is viable to dedicate a number
of sub-beams to observe calibrated sources during observations to
reﬁne the calibration.
Flexibility
The characteristics of the RF beamformer are determined at build
time for number of beams and bandwidth. The frequency band can
be moved and the available beams can be independently steered.
The digital beamformer is essentially ﬂexible in all aspects up
to the output data rate. So, numbers and bandwidth of beams,
resolution, pointing etc are all ﬂexible.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

TABLE II: RF and digital beamforming comparison continued...
Characteristic
RF Beamforming
Digital Beamforming
Power requirements
This is a relatively simple system which should minimize the
power requirements. Increasing the number of beams will increase
power; hence the bandwidth-beam count product strongly affects
the power needed. In the near term the power required for an
implementable system will be minimized by using an amount of RF
beamforming. It is to be determined what level of RF beamforming
could be accepted and still meet SKA performance speciﬁcation.
The trend in power required will reduce over time, with greater
integration and particularly with a site with low RFI, The power for
a digital system depends initially on the analogue systems which
will reduce over time and with integration, as with the RF beam-
forming. The digital system is strongly subject to improvements
with: Silicon technology Increased integration Better processing
architectures Much of the above depends on the level of NRE
spent, which must not be invested too early due to the continuing
advances in technology. There will be a time that they digital
beamformer will be equivalent or lower power than an analogue
beamformer; part of the ongoing work is to identify that transition
time.
Cost
The basic cost of a simple analogue system is relatively low and
currently substantially cheaper than a digital system. However,
increasing performance has a high incremental cost associated with
it, even assuming that it is practical to implement. The costs will
reduce with further advances in technology and with increasing
integration, but only to a limit. The current cost of a digital
beamformer is relatively high, although for station beamforming
it is affordable since so many elements are being processed. The
cost of a digital system will reduce dramatically over time for the
reasons discussed under the power discussion.
A digital beamformer has a relatively high basic cost since all the
digitisers and spectral separation processing has to be implemented
in order to make just one beam, however, the increment to add
further performance is relatively low - there is only the need
for relatively small amounts of additional processing and the
associated communications.