All-Digital Wideband Space-Frequency Beamforming for 
the SKA Aperture Array 
Vasily A. Khlebnikov, 44-01865-273302, w.khlebnikov@ieee.org, 
Kristian Zarb-Adami, 44-01865-273302, kza@astro.ox.ac.uk, 
Richard P. Armstrong, 44-01865-273302, richard.armstrong@physics.ox.ac.uk, and 
Michael E. Jones, 44-01865-273441, mike@astro.ox.ac.uk,  
Department of Astrophysics, University of Oxford, 
Denys Wilkinson Building, Keble Road, Oxford, OX1 3RH, United Kingdom 
Abstract—In this paper, we consider the problem of 
optimum multi-domain real-time beamforming and high-
precision beam pattern positioning in application to very 
large wideband array antennas, particularly to the Square 
Kilometre Array (SKA) aperture array antenna. We present 
a new structure for wideband space-frequency beamforming 
and beamsteering that maximizes detectability of cosmic 
signals over the array operational frequency range.  
1. INTRODUCTION 
The SKA is a multi-purpose radio telescope that will operate 
at metre and centimetere wave-lengths with extremely high 
sensitivity and wide field of view (FoV) and will have 
unprecedented surveying power. The range of key science to 
be tackled by the SKA covers the epoch of re-ionization, 
galaxy evolution, dark energy, cosmic magnetism, strong 
field tests of gravity, gravitational wave detection, 
transients, proto-planetary discs, and the search for extra-
terrestrial life [1]. 
More specifically, the SKA is to be a radio telescope with 
– the sensitivity to detect and image hydrogen in the early 
universe through its enormous collecting area of about 1 
million square metres. This will make it about 50 times 
more sensitive than the Extended Very Large Array 
(EVLA), and able to reach an rms noise level of 10 nano-
Jy in an 8 hour integration for a continuum observation, 
– 50% of the collecting area concentrated in the central 5 
km diameter for optimal detection of hydrogen, pulsars, 
and magnetic fields, 
– a fast surveying capability over the whole sky through 
its sensitivity and very large angle FoV. The SKA will be 
10000 times faster than the EVLA in surveying the sky, 
– the capability for detailed imaging of compact objects 
like active galactic nuclei through its large physical extent 
of at least 3000 km, 
– a frequency range from 70 MHz to 10 GHz, 
– data transport to the central data processor via very 
wideband (terabit/sec) fibre links.  
Figure 1 – Artist‘s impression of the SKA central core. 
The SKA is an interferometer array capable of imaging the 
radio sky at frequencies from 70 MHz to 10 GHz, and 
providing an all-sky monitoring capability at frequencies 
below 1.4 GHz. It covers the frequency band with three 
different kinds of receiving systems [2]-[4]: 
1. Sparse aperture arrays (AA-lo) for 70-450 MHz,  
2. Dense aperture array tiles (AA-hi) in the core of the array 
for all-sky monitoring in the frequency range 0.4-1.4 GHz, 
3. A 15m parabolic dish array, with wideband single-pixel 
feeds for 1.2-10 GHz. 
These three components all make use of the same data 
communications, processing, and software. An artist‘s 
impression of the array central core is shown in Figure 1. 
The overall structure of the SKA signal processing system is 
shown in Figure 2 and includes the collector systems on the 
left, communications and control network in the centre and 
correlation and processing on the right [4]. 
A key cost driver for the AAs is the highest frequency 
supported, due to each element having an effective area 
which is a function of λ2, hence, the number of elements 
required for a given sensitivity increases quadratically with 
frequency. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Each AA-hi station is a dense ~50m diameter circular plane 
array consisting of NA ≈ 75,000 dual polarisation elements. 
An outline design of the AA system is shown in Figure 3. 
The design consists of four main blocks:  
1. The front-end collectors. Each element of the AA-hi and 
AA-lo is positioned as part of the array design and tightly 
designed with its associated LNA for the lowest noise front-
end design. This is amplified and passed to the ―Tile 
processor‖ for initial beamforming. 
2. Tile processors perform the first stage of beamforming, 
where ~64 dual polarisation elements for the AA-hi are 
arranged using the most effective mix of RF and digital 
techniques, to form a number of tile beams. The bandwidth 
between the Tile Processors and the Station Processors is a 
key determinant of the performance of the AAs.  
3. Station processors. These bring together the output of all 
the AA tiles. They form the beams for transmission to the 
correlator. The calibration algorithms to form high precision 
station beams will be handled primarily by the station 
processors. 
4. The control processors keep the operation of the station 
coupled to the rest of the SKA. They also monitor the health 
of the arrays, detect non-functioning components and adjust 
the calibration parameters appropriately.  
Again, the signal processing is implemented in a two stage 
structure, the Tile Processors of the first stage perform the 
initial digitisation and beamforming, the number of primary 
beams - NB, their frequencies plus bandwidth and bits per 
sample can be configured at the observation time. The 
constraint is the total data rate of the internal digital links. 
Identical beams from all the tiles in each array are then 
combined in the Station Processors to produce the required 
station beams. To achieve the total FoV needed there are 
many hundreds of individual station beams. Every first 
stage processor has a link to all the Station Processors. The 
Station Processors each link to wide area communication 
fibres directly to the central correlator. 
The signal processing, which will be using integer (fixed-
point) arithmetic for efficiency in power and silicon, 
requires a capability estimated for an AA-hi array of ~10 
Peta-MACs. It has become clear that this performance level 
is achievable using either a dedicated ASIC solution, or 
massively multi-core parallel integer processors. This latter 
processing solution is very attractive for flexibility and the 
implementation of novel algorithms. 
The main objective of the paper is the design and 
performance optimization of a cost-effective structure of all-
digital 
real-time 
space-frequency 
beamforming 
beamsteering for the SKA station dense AA. 
As mentioned above, the main challenges of the design are 
associated with limited computational power of a given 
silicon technology. 
The upper bound of the computational power assessed 
through the product of the data bandwidth (data rate) and 
dynamic range (number of bits per sample) is a key 
determinant of all-digital beamforming performance. 
Figure 2 – SKA implementation using AAs and single pixel feeds on dishes 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

According to the SKA research and design studies [2]-[4], 
forthcoming DSP technologies will be capable of handling 
the input data ranged from 4-bit at 2.4 GS/s to 6-bit at 3.4 
GS/s over the 700 MHz frequency extent.  
Unfortunately, these data attributes do not allow the SKA 
antenna processor designers to ―digitize‖ directly the analog 
WB/UWB beamforming structures outlined in [5] due to 
enormously high computational power that would require 
for the all-digital implementation. 
The leading idea of realizable all-digital WB beamforming 
underlain in the SKA station AA design [2]-[4] is to reduce 
the internal and output data rate by making use of parallel 
FFT-based frequency splitting applied directly to the AA 
sensor signals. 
2. FREQUENCY-SPACE BEAMFORMING 
A generalized schematic of the AA-hi beamformer that has 
been developed by the current stage of the SKA design [2]-
[4] is shown in Figure 4 where NA is the number of antenna 
array sensors, NB is the number of spatial beams, (n,n) is 
the direction the n-th beam (n = 1, … , NB) is focused on and 
NF is the number of frequency subbands to be specified by 
requirements of radio-astronomic observations.  
The Frequency-Space Beamformer (FS-BF) depicted in the 
figure is a sequence of the following array signal processors: 
the polyphase FFT-based frequency-domain demultiplexer 
purposed to form NF separate frequency slots for each of NA 
array antenna elements, the space-domain beamformer 
aimed to create NB controlled spatial beams for each of NF 
frequency subbands, and the calibration processor to correct 
amplitude-phase errors in each of NB×NF resulting beams. 
For obvious reasons, the number of linearly-independent 
partial beams, NB should not to be larger than the number of 
array antenna elements NA, i.e. NB ≤ NA. At the current stage 
of the SKA design study,  
NA ≈ 70,000, NB ≈ 1200 and NF = 1024 
Let us assess the total number of fixed-point real-valued 
multiplications the FS-beamformer requires to process NF 
input successive snapshots in forming NB spatial beams for 
each of NF frequency subbands. This value will serve as a 
benchmark in estimation of a beamforming structure‘s 
implementation cost.  
The number of multiplications required to perform the 
frequency-domain stage of the FS-beamforming is 
MFS1 = O{2NANF log2NF} 
At the second stage of processing, when the FS-beamformer 
assembles and focuses the corresponding spatial beams, the 
number of real-valued multiplications it consumes is about 
0.7 - 1.4 GHz
analog
Station Control
Processors
Tile
Processor
- lo
TL_0
TL_m
Tile
Processor
- hi
TH_0
TH_n
.....
.....
Station
Processor  0
.....
Long Distance Drivers
.....
Long Distance Drivers
.....
.....
.....
0.3 - 1.0 GHz
analog
.....
Station Processor  n
max 4 station
pocessors
.....
Local processing
e.g. cal, pulsars
Distributed to all
processors in the Station
12 fibre lines @
10 Gb/s each
12 fibre lines @
10 Gb/s each
10 Gb/s fibre
To Correlator
To Correlator
Typical:
AA-hi tiles           300
AA-lo tiles             45
Total:                   354
I/p data rate       42 Tb/s
Figure 3 – Outline AA station 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Frequency
splitting
FIR Filters
Linear
Combiners
From ADCs
(nn)
beam 1
subband  1
FIR Filters
Linear
Combiners
beam NB
beam 1
subband  NF
beam NB
Cal & Corr
Cal & Corr
Space
beamforming
beamsteering
(nn)
Figure 4 – Frequency-Space beamformer 
MFS2 = O{4NBNANF} 
Thus, the total number of real-valued multiplications the 
FS-beamformer requires is  
MFS =MFS1+MFS2= O{2NANF(log2NF + 2NB)} 
As follows from the theory of optimum space-time signal 
processing [6], the FS-beamforming scheme that has been 
derived using the ―narrowband‖ approach [2]-[4] is a space-
time filter well-matched only to the signals whose 
autocorrelation function widths are much longer than the 
maximum time delay of the signals envelopes across the 
array aperture. 
Because of this property the beamformer may become 
substantially non-optimal (lossy) for a wide variety of 
WB/UWB cosmic signals including short-living transients, 
pulsars fine-grained signatures, etc.  
It needs also to add the following remarks concerning HW 
implementations of the FS-beamformer. 
Short bit-grid size quantised sample sequences are known to 
have the quantisation noise component attributed with the 
irregular multi-peak power spectrum. In order to mitigate 
the quantisation aliasing, we have to use an additional bank 
of NA×NF passband FIR-filters at the FFT‘s outputs. 
The phase-shifting realization appears to be numerically 
expensive as it requires two operations of full dimensional 
complex multiplication. 
At last, the FS-BF structure suffers from WB frequency 
aberration that significantly complicates the system of beam 
position control.  
3. SPACE-FREQUENCY BEAMFORMING 
Obeying the theory of optimum space-time signal 
processing [6], we conceive the SKA station beamformer as 
a wideband spatial filter to be matched to any kind of 
expected radio-astronomy signals through maximizing the 
sample signal-to-noise power ratio (SNR) at the filter 
outputs at each time discrete. 
Thus, in order to make the space-time filter really optimum 
for any radio-astronomic signal, both full-band and 
narrowband, we have to arrange spatial beamforming and 
beamsteering just before frequency demultiplexing. 
A newly designed structure of the all-digital wideband AA-
hi beamformer that could be named as the Space-Frequency 
Beamformer (SF-BF) is presented in Figure 5.  
Frequency
splitting
From ADCs
Delays
(11)
FIR Filters
beam 1
sub-
band 1
sub-
band NF
beam NB
Delays
(NN)
FIR Filters
sub-
band 1
sub-
band NF
Cal & Corr
Cal & Corr
Space
beamsteering
Space
beamforming
Cal & Corr
Cal & Corr
Figure 5 – Space-Frequency beamformer 
From the figure is seen that the SF-beamformer contains NB 
parallel processing arms to form NB individually steered 
wideband spatial beams, with each beam decomposed onto 
NF frequency subbands. 
Each beamforming arm of the scheme is a two-stage real-
time digital signal processor containing the wideband spatial 
processor to form the full-band beam pattern directed 
towards the prescribed point, (n,n), and the polyphase 
FFT-based demultiplexer that performs final frequency 
multiple down-conversion. 
Unlike the FS-BF space processing sub-system, which 
implements the standard narrowband routine of complex-
valued matrix-matrix multiplication, the new full-band SF-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

BF space processor is designed to operate in two following 
sub-stages:  
1. Wideband Beamsteering realized by the NA-element 
banks of frequency independent digital delays which align 
the input signal samples to focus the n-th SF-BF arm on the 
corresponding direction (n,n) [7], 
2. Staggered Narrowband Beamforming implemented by 
the Synchronous Commutators (SC) and corresponding 
adders to perform time-distributed narrowband spatial 
integration. 
Let us take a more detailed look at the both techniques of 
the new all-digital wideband beamforming. 
Wideband Digital Time-Aligning 
There three techniques of precise digital time-aligning could 
be considered eligible for use in the SKA aperture array 
processor: 
1. Silicon gate based keyed delay banks, 
2. FIR-filtering based, HW-level realizations consisted of 
FIFO structures for integer (coarse-grained) delaying and 
FIR filters for fractional (fine-grained) delaying [8], 
3. Linear interpolation, SW-level implementations that 
imply re-indexing of data samples for integer delaying and 
time-domain linear interpolation of successive samples for 
fractional delaying. 
The latter method looks like the most attractive to be 
implemented on massively multi-core parallel fixed-point 
(integer) processors. 
The leading idea of the linear interpolation based digital 
delaying is very simple. Generally, a given time delay,  is 
 = I + F,  I = nS,  n = 1,2, … 
where S is the sample time discrete, I and F is the integer 
and fractional part, respectively. As mentioned above, the 
integer delay can easily be implemented by means of re-
indexation or using a conventional shift register. 
Let us consider a scenario when a reference wavefront 
crosses the time axis of a given space channel between two 
successive signal samples as shown in Figure 6. 
From the picture is evident that in place of fractional 
delaying we can use the sample that linearly interpolated 
between the early and late samples using the following 
simple expression 
ST = SL + (1 – )SE 
where 
 = (S – )/S = 2/S 
Late
sample
Required
fractional
delay
1 = F
Reference
wavefront
Early
sample
Interpolated
sample
S = 1 + 2
Figure 6 – Linear interpolation based fractional delaying 
Following this ―substitution‖ technique, we can reconstruct 
the true wavefront position for any given boresight. 
Staggered Narrowband Beamforming 
The second stage of spatial beamforming in a single-beam 
SF-beamforming arm, or beam-shaping is implemented by 
NA SC‘s and NF adders.   
The adders in the beamformer are designed to be without 
precision losses, i.e. the data dynamic range of partial two-
item sums gradually extends from the front-end to the back-
end until it becomes sufficient, e.g. 8- to 12-bit. 
The digital FIR-filters and corresponding FFT units aimed 
to finish polyphase frequency demultiplexing in the SF-
beamformer are identical to those in the FS-beamforming 
system. 
Let us count the total number of real-valued multiplications 
the SF-BF consumes to form NB spatial beams for each of 
NF frequency slots. 
If the SF-beamformer uses the linear interpolation method 
in time aligning the input samples then the number of real-
valued multiplications at the first ―space‖ stage of 
processing is about 
MSF1 = O{NANB } 
At the second ―frequency‖ stage of processing, the FS-
beamformer should perform about 
MSF2 = O{2NBNF log2NF} 
real multiplications. The total number of operations is 
MSF = MSF1 + MSF2 = O{NB(NA + 2NF log2NF)} 
(10) 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

4. CONCLUSIONS 
We consider the SKA station beamformer as a wideband 
spatial filter to be matched to any kind of expected radio-
astronomy signals through maximizing the sample SNR at 
the filter outputs at each time discrete. 
The structure of the new beamformer is built following the 
rule of ‗spatial integration first‘ to avoid processing losses 
in the sample SNR‘s for all kinds of cosmic signals in the 
environment of short bit-grid size digital representation of 
input data streams. 
Beamsteering is implemented by making use of frequency 
independent high-precision digital time-aligning of antenna 
signals that reduces the complexity of the beamformer and 
keeps the unified time scale unbroken. 
Numerous simulations have shown that as expected the SF-
beamformer provides the same detection performance of 
weak continuous harmonic signals in additive white 
Gaussian noise (AWGN) as the BF-beamformer does. 
Meanwhile, we expect the SF-beamformer configuration to 
outperform the FS-BF structure in terms of detection 
sensitivity for wideband and full-band signals of interest. 
The newly designed beamforming configuration offers 
much better advantages from the standpoint of effective 
implementation on dedicated ASIC‘s, or on massively 
multi-core parallel integer ASIP‘s. 
Using (1) in (4) and (10), we have the following result 
TABLE I      
FS-beamformer 
SF-beamformer 
Real-valued 
multiplications 
~3.6∙1011 
~1.2∙108 
Providing the same signal detection capability, the new 
beamforming configuration outperforms by far the known 
structure in terms of computational complexity and hence in 
terms of cost, reliability and power consumption.  
REFERENCES  
[1] C. Carilli and S. Rawlings (eds.), ―Science with the 
Square Kilometre Array‖, New Astron. Rev., vol. 48, 
Elsevier, Dec. 2004. 
[2] R. T. Schilizzi at al. (2007, July). ―Preliminary 
Specifications for the Square Kilometre Array‖, [Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.skatelescope.org/pages/page_memos.htm. 
[3] A. J. Faulkner et al. (2007, November). ―Design of an 
Aperture Phased Array System for the SKA‖, [Online]. 
Available: www.skads-eu.org/p/memos.php. 
[4] A. J. Faulkner et al. (2010, March). ―Aperture Arrays for 
the SKA: The SKADS White Paper‖, [Online]. Available: 
http://www.skads-eu.org/p/memos.php.  
[5] J.D. Taylor, Introduction to UWB Radar, CRC Press, 
1995. 
[6] H. L. Van Trees, Optimum Array Processing. Part VI of 
Detection, Estimation and Modulation Theory, Wiley, 2002. 
[7] R.J. Mailloux, Phased Array Antenna Handbook, 2nd ed., 
Artech House, 2005. 
[8] V. Valimaki and T.I. Laakso, ―Principles of Fractional 
Delay,‖ Proceedings of the ICASSP’00, Istanbul, Turkey, 5-9 
June, 2000.  

--- PAGE BREAK ---

