arXiv:1108.5402v1  [astro-ph.IM]  26 Aug 2011
Performance of Polarimetric Beamformers for Phased Array Radio Telescopes
Marianna V. Ivashina1, Stefan J. Wijnholds2, Rob Maaskant1, and Karl F. Warnick3
1 Chalmers University of Technology, SE-412 96 Gothenburg, Sweden. Email: ivashina@chalmers.se
2 ASTRON, Oude Hoogeveensedijk 4, NL-7991 PD, Dwingeloo, The Netherlands. Email:
wijnholds@astron.nl
3 Brigham Young University, 459 Clyde Building, Provo, UT 84602, USA. Email: warnick@ee.byu.edu
Abstract
The results of four recently introduced beamforming schemes for phased array systems are discussed, each
of which is capable to provide high sensitivity and accurate polarimetric performance of array-based radio
telescopes. Ideally, a radio polarimeter should recover the actual polarization state of the celestial source,
and thus compensate for unwanted polarization degradation eﬀects which are intrinsic to the instrument. In
this paper, we compare the proposed beamforming schemes through an example of a practical phased array
system (APERTIF prototype) and demonstrate that the optimal beamformer, the max-SLNR beamformer,
the eigenvector beamformer, and the bi-scalar beamformer are sensitivity equivalent but lead to diﬀerent
polarization state solutions, some of which are sub-optimal.
Introduction
The radio astronomy community has recently decided upon the science cases that future radio telescopes
must enable, which directly translate into stringent requirements on the instrument’s survey speed. These
include beam sensitivity, size of the ﬁeld-of-view (FoV), number of simultaneous beams, and frequency
bandwidth, as well as on the polarization purity of the instrument. Conventional single-beam antennas are
not capable to conform to these multi-beaming performance speciﬁcations. Research has therefore been
focused on phased-array antenna concepts, since then the individual antenna array output signals can be
weighted to realize multiple desired beams. Furthermore, array signal processing techniques can be used
to exploit the degrees of freedom in the beamformer weights for increased beam sidelobe level control,
interference rejection, and gain and noise level control of the beams (SNR) [1, 2].
To date, the polarimetric response of the antenna array has not received much of attention and only one
polarization is usually considered at a time. Further, as the radio polarimeter is essentially summing up vector
element patterns, the polarization characteristics of the realized beam is weight dependent too. In turn, this
enables us to create two beams in one direction forming an orthogonal polarimetric beam pair. Moreover,
signal processing techniques can be developed to collectively optimize for the SNR and orthogonality of a
polarimetric beam pair. This paper assesses the results for four diﬀerent beamforming schemes that have
recently been proposed: the optimal beamformer, the max-SLNR beamformer, the eigenvector beamformer,
and the bi-scalar beamformer. The beam pair sensitivities are shown for the APERFIF prototype system [2],
for all beamforming scenarios. The polarimetric quality of each pair of nominally orthogonally polarized
beams is expressed in terms of a Jones matrix. This formulation is used in a numerical model to study the
performance of several possible algorithms for polarimetric array beamformer weight design.
Polarimetric Beamforming
Figure 1 provides a system level view of a polarimetric antenna system. The polarimetric properties of the
source are deﬁned by the 2×2 source covariance matrix Rs, which gives the covariance of the source signal in
two polarizations deﬁned in a suitable coordinate system. The transfer function of our instrument, including
antennas, receiver chains and a beamformer, can be described in the form of a 2 × 2 Jones matrix J, which
describes how the input voltages in two polarizations are transformed into two polarimetric output signals. If
we correlate these output signals, we get the beamformer output covariance matrix Ro. This is used as input

--- PAGE BREAK ---

instrument
pol. correction
Figure 1: A system level view of a radio polarimeter.
for further processing, that ultimately produces a reconstructed source covariance matrix R′
s that should
ideally be proportional to Rs. An ideal system does not require polarimetric correction, since it has J = I,
where I denotes the identity matrix, i.e., it leaves the covariance matrix of the input signal unchanged and
does not introduce so-called instrumental polarization. By choosing appropriate beamformer weights, the
instrumental polarization introduced by the antennas and other analog electronics can be compensated for
in the beamformer. In this paper, we compare the polarimetric and sensitivity performance of four proposed
beamformers:
optimal beamformer In this beamforming scheme, we assume that we know the response of the system to
two reference signals with mutually perfectly orthogonal polarization. We then maximize the sensitivity
under the constraint that J = I by minimizing the receiver output noise power [3].
max-SLNR beamformer The optimal beamformer imposes a hard constraint on the instrumental transfer
function. By optimizing the signal-to-leakage-and-noise ratio, one can turn this into a soft constraint
that does not suppress the leakage further than the noise level in the calibration measurement. This
ensures that the noise in the calibration measurement is not over-interpreted.
eigenvector beamformer This more practical beamformer is based on the fact that an unpolarized signal
can be regarded as a superposition of two uncorrelated orthogonally polarized signals. We can thus
produce two orthogonal output signals by measuring the signal covariance matrix of the antenna
outputs, which is a rank-2 matrix, and associating each beamformer output with one of the dominant
eigenvectors [4]. If the phased array feed consists of two sets of single polarization elements, we can
make an approximate polarimetric correction by exploiting the intrinsic polarization of each set of
elements.
bi-scalar beamformer This beamformer assumes that the array consists of two sets of single polariza-
tion elements and simply applies max-SNR beamforming to these sets separately to obtain the two
beamformer outputs.
Numerical Results
The following results pertain to the APERTIF prototype system which includes a phased array feed
consisting of 144 tapered slot antenna elements, 144 low noise ampliﬁers and an active (digital) beamforming
network. The entire receiving system has been modeled by an enhanced version of the method of moments
used as the electromagnetic simulation software, combined with a microwave circuit simulator (CAESAR),
and the high frequency electromagnetic solver GRASP for modeling the reﬂector antenna [5, 6].
Figure 2(a) illustrates the magnitude of the Jones matrix element |J11| for the optimal method. Element
|J11| indicates the beam intensity that is referenced to output 1 of the Jones polarimeter. The results are
shown for 37 beams and have been overlayed (not summed) to ease the comparison between the beams
within the ﬁeld of view. Figure 2(b) shows |J11| along the φ = 0o direction (for the on-axis and 3x2 oﬀ-axis
beams) for the four beamforming scenarios. The values of |J11| are the same for the optimal, eigenvalue
and max-SLNR methods. The bi-scalar method measures a lower ﬁeld intensity since half of the antenna

--- PAGE BREAK ---

output signals are combined into an x beam, and the other half into a y beam, respectively. Figure 2(c) plots
the Jones matrix element |J12| for 37 beams. The element |J12| measures the degree of cross-polarization
leakage for the optimal beamformer. Clearly, the polarization purity is very high in the beam centers, but
deteriorates towards the periphery of the beam and can become as high as -15dB for the beams at the edge
of the FoV. Figure 2(d) shows the cut φ = 0o for |J12| for the four beamforming scenarios. It is remarkable
to see that the eigenvector beamformer leads to a cross-polarization leakage which can be as high as -5dB,
while the cross-polarization leakage for the beams obtained with the other beamforming schemes is as low
as -20dB for the same beam directions. Figure 2(e) indicates that for the bi-scalar method, the polarization
homogeneity across the beam can be signiﬁcantly poorer than that of the full-polarization beamformers, and
the cross-polarization leakage can rapidly degrade to -12dB for out-of-center beams. Figure 2(f) illustrates
the beam sensitivities at the two beamformer outputs for the optimal and bi-scalar method. In addition, the
sensistivity bounds are shown for the optimal, bi-scalar, eigenvalue, and max-SLNR beamforming methods.
These upper and lower bounds are the same for all methods, except for the bi-scalar method, for which
these bounds are lower because this scheme does not beamform all antenna output signals and therefore
compromises the sensitivity and beam polarization purity, in particular for out-of-center beams.
Clearly, |J1,2| →0 at the beam centers for both the optimal and max-SLNR beamformers. Hence, the
IEEE deﬁnitions for cross-polarization, i.e. the cross-polarization discrimination (XPD) and isolation (XPI)
values, tend to inﬁnity at the beam centers. This surely meets the SKA speciﬁcation, which states that
the raw cross-polarization level (before calibration) must be lower than -20dB at zenith [7]. However, the
polarimetric homogeneity of the PAF beams is not constant over the FoV and rapidly degrades as a function
of oﬀ-axis angle of observation, especially for the bi-scalar beamformer. This implies that further calibration
must be done to correct for the direction dependent artefacts in interferometric images, in particularly when
the dominant source moves away from the centre to the periphery of the beam [8].
References
[1] B. D. Jeﬀs and K. F. Warnick. Signal processing for phased array feeds in radio astronomical telescopes.
2(5):635–646, October 2008.
[2] M. V. Ivashina, O. Iupikov, R. Maaskant, W. van Cappellen, and T. Oosterloo. An Optimal Beam-
forming Strategy for Wide-Field Surveys With Phased-Array-Fed Reﬂector Antennas. to appear in the
Special Issue on Antennas for Next Generation Radio Telescopes of the IEEE Trans. on Antennas and
Propagation, 49(3), 2011.
[3] K.F. Warnick, B. Jeﬀs, M. Ivashina, R. Maaskant, and S.J. Wijnholds.
Polarimetric Phased Ar-
ray Beamforming and Calibration.
In International Workshop on Phased Array Antenna Systems
for Radio Astronomy, Brigham Young University, Provo (Utah), USA, 3-5 May 2010.
Available:
http://csas.ee.byu.edu/docs/Workshop/2010WorkshopPresentations.phtml.
[4] B. Veidt. Polarimetry with Phased Array Feeds. In International Workshop on Phased Array Antenna
Systems for Radio Astronomy, Brigham Young University, Provo (Utah), USA, 3-5 May 2010. Available:
http://csas.ee.byu.edu/docs/Workshop/2010WorkshopPresentations.phtml.
[5] M. Ivashina, O. Iupikov, and W. van Cappellen. Extending the capabilities of the grasp and caesar
software to analyze and optimize active beamforming array feeds for reﬂector systems. In Proc. Int.
Conf. on Electromagn. in Adv. Applicat. (ICEAA), pages 197–200, Syndey, September 2010.
[6] R. Maaskant. Analysis of Large Antenna Systems. PhD thesis, The Eindhoven University of Technology,
2010. Online Available: http://alexandria.tue.nl/extra2/201010409.pdf.
[7] R. T. Schilizzi et al. Memo 100: Preliminary Speciﬁcations for the Square Kilometre Array. Technical
report, 2007. Online Available: http://www.skatelescope.org/PDF/memos/100 Memo Schilizzi.pdf.
[8] O. M. Smirnov. Revisiting the radio interferometer measurement equation. II. Calibration and direction-
dependent eﬀects. Astron. & Astroph., (527):p. A107, March 2011.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

−1.5
−0.5
−2.5
−1.5
−0.5
|J1,1|, [dB]
θ, deg
optimal
eigenvalue
bi−scalar
max−SLNR
(a) |J11| of 37 beams (optimal method)
(b) |J11| at φ = 0o for several beamformers
−1.5
−0.5
|J1,2|, [dB]
θ, deg
optimal
eigenvalue
bi−scalar
max−SLNR
(c) |J12| of 37 beams (optimal method)
(d) |J12| at φ = 0o for several beamformers
−1.5
−0.5
Sensitivity, [m2/K]
θ, deg
BF output 1 (optimal)
BF output 2 (optimal)
BF output 1 (biscalar)
BF output 2 (biscalar)
bound (optimal)
bound (biscalar)
bound (eigenvalue)
bound (max−SLNR)
(e) |J12| of 37 beams (biscalar method)
(f) Beam sensitivities at φ = 0o for several beamformers
Figure 2: Simulated Jones matrix elements for several PAF beams and polarimetric beamforming methods.
Since the half-power-beamwidth is equal approximately to 0.5o, the beam separation distance is about one
half-power beamwidth.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

−1.5
−0.5
−2.5
−1.5
−0.5
|J2,2|, [dB]
θ, deg
optimal
eigenvalue
bi−scalar
max−SLNR