RF power transport 
S. Choroba 
DESY, Hamburg, Germany 
Abstract  
This paper deals with the techniques of transport of high-power RF from an 
RF power source to the cavities of an accelerator. Since the theory of 
electromagnetic waves in waveguides and of waveguide components is very 
well explained in a number of excellent text books it will limit itself to 
special waveguide distributions and to some special problems which 
sometimes occur in RF power transportation systems. 
Introduction  
The task of an RF power transportation system in an accelerator is to transport the RF power generated 
by an RF power source to the cavity of an accelerator. Sometimes it is necessary to combine the power 
of several RF sources and very often it is necessary to transport the power to not just one cavity but a 
number of cavities. It is usually the aim to transport the power with high efficiency and high 
reliability.  
Different types of transportation systems can be considered. Parallel wires or strip lines can be 
used to transport electromagnetic waves, but they can not be used for high-power RF transport 
because of their low power capability due to radiation in the environment or electrical breakdown 
above a certain power level. Coaxial lines and hollow waveguides can be used to transport high-power 
RF.  Coaxial lines are used at lower frequencies up to some 100 MHz and power of some 10 kW. 
Hollow waveguides typically are used for frequencies above some 100 MHz, power levels of more 
than some 10 kW up to several 10 MW and distances of several metres. Coaxial lines are used at these 
parameters only for short distances or when efficiency does not play the key role. This is due to losses 
in the inner conductor of the coaxial line, losses in the dielectric material, or breakdown between the 
inner and outer conductor of the coaxial line at high power level. There is of course no sharp line 
when to use coaxial lines or hollow waveguides. Although coaxial lines are in use at accelerators the 
next sections will concentrate on hollow waveguides since they are used in a larger number of 
applications.  
Theory of electromagnetic waves in waveguides and of waveguide components 
The theory of electromagnetic waves in waveguides and of waveguide components can be found in a 
number of excellent text books [1–4], School articles[5–6], or School transparencies [7], some of 
which are listed in the references. Therefore the theory will not be repeated here. 
Waveguide distributions 
Waveguides distributions are combinations of different waveguide components. They allow for power 
transport, combination, and distribution of RF power. In addition they protect the RF power source 
from reflected power and allow for adjustment of RF parameters like amplitude, phase, or Qext. 
Distributions can be complicated assemblies and sometimes different options exist to fulfil certain 
requirements.  

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The size of the waveguide is at first determined by the RF frequency. It is then still possible to 
choose between two standard sizes. For the transport of RF power at 1.3 GHz, for example, one can 
consider WR650 or WR770 waveguides. The decision depends on considerations like maximum 
power to be transmitted, space availability for the installation, weight, cost, or availability of 
waveguide components on the market. Whereas the maximum power demand might require larger 
size, space demands lead to smaller dimensions.  
The type of distribution system depends on similar considerations. In addition, demands like 
required isolation between cavities (cross talk), RF parameters to be controlled or adjusted, and more 
requirements must be considered. It is therefore worth while to take into account all possible 
requirements as early as possible and to trade them off against each other.  
Figure 1 shows the principle of a waveguide distribution system proposed for the TESLA linear 
collider. The RF power is generated by a 10 MW high-power klystron and extracted by two output 
windows towards four accelerator modules with eight superconducting cavities each.  In order to 
achieve a gradient of 23.4 MV/m an input power of 231 kW per cavity is required. The total power 
produced by the RF power source must take into account losses in the waveguides and a regulation 
reserve. The power of each klystron waveguide arm is split again by a 3db-hybrid. For each module a 
linear distribution system similar to that in Fig. 2 is used. Equal amounts of power are branched off for 
the individual cavities by hybrids with different coupling ratio. Isolators (three port circulators with 
loads) capable of 400 kW protect the power source from reflected power travelling back from the 
cavities during the filling time of the cavities or in case of mismatch or breakdown in the cavities. 
Three stub tuners or phase shifters can be used for adjustment of phase and Qext.  
Fig. 1: Principle of an RF power transport system proposed for the TESLA linear collider 
Fig. 2: Linear waveguide distribution system 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Instead of a linear distribution system a tree-like system can be used (Fig. 3). The power is divided by 
shunt tees into several branches like branches of a tree. 
Fig. 3: Tree-like waveguide distribution system 
In Fig. 4, examples of distributions meeting the requirements of power distributions for the 
FLASH facility at DESY are shown. The input power for the distribution can be up to 2.5 MW. Both 
distributions can be used to meet the requirements but because of certain advantages the first one will 
be used in the future for the European XFEL. The latter and older system is a linear system and is used 
for the first accelerator modules at FLASH at DESY. The combined system proposed for the European 
XFEL and in use for the new RF distributions at FLASH makes use of asymmetric shunt tees of 
different coupling ratios. Equal amounts of power are branched off to a pair of cavities. By adjustment 
of tuning posts inside the tees the coupling ratios can be adjusted, thus changing the branching ratio. 
The phase between a pair of cavities is pre-tuned by fixed phase shifters (straight waveguides with 
different waveguide width). The phase for the individual cavities can be adjusted by movable 
mechanical phase shifters after the symmetric shunt tee which splits the power for two cavities. 
Isolators in front of each cavity protect the power source from reflected power. This system has 
several advantages. Space and weight are reduced compared with the linear system. Phasing is much 
easier than in the purely linear system. Because of the use of components of similar type the cost can 
be decreased. This system can also be pre-assembled and connected to an accelerator module before 
the module is installed in the accelerator tunnel, thus simplifying the entire installation procedure. An 
accelerator module with RF waveguide distribution can be seen in Fig. 5. 
 Fig. 4: Combined and linear RF waveguide distribution system 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Fig. 5: Accelerator module and RF waveguide distribution 
More information on the waveguide distribution systems for TESLA, FLASH, and the 
European XFEL can be found in Refs. [8–12]. 
Limitations, problems, and countermeasures 
In this section some limitations, problems, and possible countermeasures in RF power transportation 
systems are covered. 
The power PRF, which can be transmitted in a rectangular waveguide of size a times b in TE10 
mode of wavelength is given by  
with 
where E in V/cm is the electrical field strength of the electromagnetic wave and g the guide 
wavelength. The maximum power is the power at the electrical breakdown limit Emax. In air Emax is 
30 kV/cm, which results in an RF power of 58 MW at 1.3 GHz in a WR650 waveguide. Experience 
shows that this power can not be achieved. In practice it is 5 to 10 times lower. The practical power 
limit is lower for a variety of different reasons, e.g., smaller size of the inner waveguide dimensions 
(e.g. within circulators), surface effects (roughness, steps at flanges (see Fig. 6) etc.), dust in 
waveguides, humidity of the gas inside the waveguide, reflections (VSWR), or because of higher order 
modes in TEnm/TMnm.  
These HOMs can be generated by the power source or by non-linear effects at high power in 
non-reciprocal devices like circulators. If these modes are not damped, they can be excited resonantly 
and reach very high field strength above the breakdown limit. In order to damp HOMs, higher order 
mode dampers can be installed. These can be complicated and specially designed devices, which 
couple out and damp the HOMs only, leaving the fundamental mode, which is transmitted in TE10, 
6.63
V / cm

--- PAGE BREAK ---

untouched. But sometimes a quick solution must be found. This can be accomplished by inserting 
small antennas on the small side of the waveguides (see Fig. 7). These antennas couple to a number of 
HOMs in TEnm/TMnm. Since the field of TE10 is already small at the antenna position, only a small 
amount of the power in the fundamental mode is coupled out. The antennas must be connected to 
loads, which must be able to handle the full amount of the power coupled out. 
Fig. 6: Waveguide which has been damaged at the flange by breakdown 
Fig. 7: Waveguide with damping antennas on the small side of the waveguide 
One could increase the gas pressure inside the waveguide, which due to Paschen’s law would 
increase the power capability. But this requires enforced and gas-tight waveguides. In addition the 
pressure vessel rules applicable in many countries most be followed. By using SF6 instead of air, 
which has Emax = 89 kV/cm (at 1 bar, 20°C), the power capability can be increased, too. The problem 
of SF6 is that although it is chemically very stable it is a greenhouse gas, and if cracked in sparks can 
together with the hydrogen of the remaining water form HF, which is a very aggressive acid. HF can 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

produce fluorides of the metal of the waveguide walls which one can sometimes find as white powder 
in the waveguides (see Fig. 8). Other poisonous chemicals, e.g., S2F10 are also produced. Personnel 
maintaining waveguide components which have been operated in SF6 have to observe a number of 
safety rules and wear personal protection equipment (see Fig. 9). 
Fig. 8: Fuorides in a waveguide 
Fig. 9: Staff wearing protective clothing during work at SF6 waveguides 
Acknowledgements 
The author would like to thank two persons who among others supported him during preparation of 
this lecture. Valery Katalev provided simulation results and pictures of waveguide distributions. Ingo 
Sandvoss took many photographs. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

References 
 [1] R. E. Collin, Foundations for Microwave Engineering (McGraw Hill, New York, 1992). 
 [2] D. M. Pozar, Microwave Engineering, 3rd ed. (Wiley, Hoboken, NJ, 2004).   
 [3] N. Marcuvitz, Waveguide Handbook, MIT Radiation Laboratory Series, Vol. 10 (McGraw Hill, 
New York, 1951). 
 [4] H. J. Reich, P. F. Ordung, H. L.Krauss, and J. G. Skalnik, Microwave Theory and Techniques 
(D. van Nostrand, New York, 1953). 
 [5] R. K. Cooper and R. G. Carter, High power RF transmission, in Proceedings of the CERN 
Accelerator School: Radio Frequency Engineering, Seeheim, Germany, 2000, CERN 2005–03, 
Ed. J. Miles. 
 [6] R. K. Cooper, High power RF transmission, in Proceedings of the CERN Accelerator School: 
RF Engineering for Particle Accelerators, Oxford, UK, 1991, CERN 92–03, Ed. S. Turner. 
 [7] A. Nassiri, Microwave Physics and Techniques, USPAS, Santa Barbara, 2003. 
 [8] V. Katalev and S. Choroba, RF power distributing waveguide system for TESLA, Proceedings 
of the Russian Particle Accelerator Conference, Rupac 2002, Obninsk, Russia, 2002, p. 79. 
 [9] V. Katalev and S. Choroba, Tuning of external Q and phase for the cavities of a superconducting 
linear accelerator, Proceedings of the XXII International Linear Accelerator Conference, Linac 
2004, Lübeck, Germany, 2004, p. 724. 
[10] V. Katalev and S. Choroba, Compact waveguide distribution with asymmetric shunt tees for the 
European XFEL, Proceedings of the 22nd Particle Accelerator Conference, PAC07, 
Albuquerque, USA, 2007, p. 176.  
[11] S. Choroba et al., Operation experience with the FLASH RF waveguide distribution system at 
DESY, Proceedings of the XXIV Linear Accelerator Conference, LINAC08, Victoria, BC, 
Canada, 2008, p. 978. 
[12] V. Katalev and S. Choroba, Waveguide distribution for FLASH, Sixth CW and High Average 
Power RF Workshop, CWRF2010, Barcelona, Spain, 4–7 May 2010 http://cwrf2010.cells.es/ . 