Draft Version November 6, 2018
Preprint typeset using LATEX style AASTeX6 v. 1.0
GAS LOSS BY RAM PRESSURE STRIPPING AND INTERNAL FEEDBACK FROM LOW MASS MILKY WAY
SATELLITES
Andrew Emerick1,2, Mordecai-Mark Mac Low2,1,3, Jana Grcevich2, Andrea Gatto4
(Dated: November 6, 2018)
1Department of Astronomy, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA
2Department of Astrophysics, American Museum of Natural History, New York, NY, USA
3Institut f¨ur Theoretische Astrophysik, Zentrum f¨ur Astronomie der Universit¨at Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany
4Max-Planck-Institute f¨ur Astrophysik, Garching, bei M¨unchen, Germany
ABSTRACT
The evolution of dwarf satellites of the Milky Way is aﬀected by the combination of ram pressure
and tidal stripping, and internal feedback from massive stars. We investigate gas loss processes in the
smallest satellites of the Milky Way using three-dimensional, high resolution, idealized wind tunnel
simulations, accounting for gas loss through both ram pressure stripping and expulsion by supernova
feedback. Using initial conditions appropriate for a dwarf galaxy like Leo T, we investigate whether
or not environmental gas stripping and internal feedback can quench these low mass galaxies on the
expected timescales, shorter than 2 Gyr. We ﬁnd that supernova feedback contributes negligibly to
the stripping rate for these low star formation rate galaxies. However, we also ﬁnd that ram pressure
stripping is less eﬃcient than expected in the stripping scenarios we consider. Our work suggests
that, although ram pressure stripping can eventually completely strip these galaxies, other physics is
likely at play to reconcile our computed stripping times with the rapid quenching timescales deduced
from observations of low mass Milky Way dwarf galaxies. We discuss the roles additional physics may
play in this scenario, including host-satellite tidal interactions, cored vs. cuspy dark matter proﬁles,
reionization, and satellite pre-processing.
We conclude that a proper accounting of these physics
together is necessary to understand the quenching of low mass Milky Way satellites.
1. INTRODUCTION
Environmental eﬀects on galaxy evolution have been
well studied for massive galaxies in galaxy clusters, both
observationally (e.g. Cayatte et al. 1994; Chung et al.
2007; Vollmer et al. 2010; Abramson et al. 2011; Ken-
ney et al. 2014) and with hydrodynamic simulations
(e.g. Abadi et al. 1999; Quilis et al. 2000; Roediger &
Hensler 2005; Tonnesen et al. 2007; Kronberger et al.
2008; Roediger 2009; Ruszkowski et al. 2014).
pressure stripping (RPS) of satellite galaxies by halo
gas is a well established mechanism for quenching star
formation, and is one mechanism responsible for the ob-
served density-morphology relationship in galaxy clus-
ters (Gunn & Gott 1972; Abadi et al. 1999; Poggianti
et al. 1999). With the exception of the Large and Small
Magellanic Clouds (LMC and SMC), the most massive
of the Milky Way’s (MW) satellites, all known dwarf
galaxies within 300 kpc of the MW remain undetected
in H I (Grcevich & Putman 2009), and have no ob-
servable star formation (McConnachie 2012). This sug-
gests strong, environmental quenching of satellite dwarf
galaxies after infall (Wetzel et al. 2015b), which has
been argued to be produced by rapid RPS after ﬁrst
pericenter passage (Slater & Bell 2013, 2014). The im-
portance of environmental quenching is further demon-
strated by the lack of quenched dwarf galaxies in the
ﬁeld (Geha et al. 2012). Work combining the properties
of observed satellites with accretion histories of subhalos
in large scale cosmological simulations (e.g. Slater & Bell
2014; Wheeler et al. 2014; Wetzel et al. 2015b; Filling-
ham et al. 2015) has placed constraints on the required
conditions for quenching and associated timescales over
the galaxy stellar mass range 104 M⊙< M∗< 1011 M⊙,
complimenting observational work examining quenching
in these galaxies (e.g Geha et al. 2006, 2012; Bradford
et al. 2015; Weisz et al. 2015).
Much focus has been placed on the ineﬃcient quench-
ing of more massive dwarf galaxies, 108 M⊙< M∗<
1011 M⊙(e.g. Wheeler et al. 2014). For the lowest mass
dwarf galaxies, M∗< 106 M⊙, these works suggest that
rapid quenching timescales < 2 Gyr are required in order
to explain the near unity quenched fraction of galax-
ies with this stellar mass.
Although RPS is a likely
candidate for rapid, environmental quenching, this pro-
cess has yet to be simulated in detail for these low mass
arXiv:1605.02746v1  [astro-ph.GA]  9 May 2016

--- PAGE BREAK ---

dwarfs; simulation work on stripping of dwarfs around
the MW has focused on more massive dwarf satellites
(e.g. Mayer et al. 2006; Nichols et al. 2015; Salem et al.
2015). In this work, we use hydrodynamic simulations
to examine RPS for these low mass dwarf galaxies to
determine its ability to quench these galaxies on short
timescales.
In addition, we examine whether or not internal feed-
back in these dwarf galaxies plays a signiﬁcant role in
the environmental quenching process. Supernova feed-
back within massive galaxies can drive large scale galac-
tic winds that can aid in the stripping process by driving
gas out to large radii where it is more easily stripped
(Creasey et al. 2013; Girichidis et al. 2016). However,
the star formation rate in these tiny galaxies is small,
on the order of 10−5 M⊙yr−1 based on observations
of the gaseous, star forming galaxies Leo T, with M∗
∼1.2 × 105 M⊙(Irwin et al. 2007; Ryan-Weber et al.
2008), and Leo P, with M∗∼5.7 × 105 M⊙(Rhode et al.
2013). Although the injection of energy through super-
nova feedback could, in principle, drive gas out from the
shallow potential wells of these galaxies, the low star
formation and therefore low supernova rates may pre-
vent substantial outﬂows (D’Ercole & Brighenti 1999;
Mac Low & Ferrara 1999; Caproni et al. 2015; Melioli
et al. 2015). Two-dimensional simulations suggest there
may be a galaxy stellar mass regime below which the
supernova rate is too low to aﬀect stripping, and above
which feedback makes a signiﬁcant contribution to the
quenching process (Gatto et al. 2013). For more massive
dwarfs, the necessary rapid quenching of satellite dwarfs
may very well only be possible through the combined ef-
fects of gas stripping and internal feedback, rather than
stripping or feedback alone (Nichols & Bland-Hawthorn
2011). However, it is unclear whether or not this is the
case for the lowest mass dwarf galaxies.
Previous simulation work on the evolution of dwarf
satellites around the MW generally focused on more
massive galaxies (e.g. Mayer et al. 2006; Nichols et al.
2015; Salem et al. 2015), were run in two-dimensions at
low resolution (Gatto et al. 2013), focused on dwarfs in
denser environments - such as groups or clusters - (Mori
& Burkert 2000; Marcolini et al. 2003), or were cosmo-
logical (e.g Zolotov et al. 2012; Brooks & Zolotov 2014;
Raﬁeferantsoa et al. 2015) and unable to adequately re-
solve the lowest mass dwarf galaxies.
We conduct the ﬁrst set of high resolution, three-
dimensional simulations examining the stripping and
quenching process in the lowest mass dwarf satellites
around the MW. We examine in detail whether or not
RPS, in combination with supernova feedback, can strip
such galaxies within the ∼2 Gyr time frame necessary
to explain the observed quenched fraction of low mass
galaxies. We discuss the implications our results might
have on star formation quenching in the lowest mass
dwarf galaxies.
In Section 2 we describe our dwarf galaxy models, sim-
ulation physics, and numerical methods. Initial condi-
tions for each of our simulations are discussed in detail
in Section 3. We present our results in Section 4 and
discuss their implications in Section 5.
2. MODELS
In Section 2.1 we discuss the initial conditions of our
dwarf galaxy models that are implemented in both our
hydrodynamical simulations and our semi-analytic mod-
els. In Section 2.2 we describe our numerical methods,
in Section 2.3 we discuss our models of radiative heat-
ing and cooling, and in Section 2.4 we discus our pre-
scription for supernova feedback. We discuss the current
understanding of the hot halo around the MW in Sec-
tion 2.5, and in this context, motivate our wind tunnel
simulations in Section 2.6.
2.1. Dwarf Galaxy Model
Our dwarf galaxy models consist of an initially isother-
mal, spherically symmetric distribution of gas placed
in hydrostatic equilibrium with a static, spherical dark
matter potential (Navarro et al. 1997, hereafter NFW).
The dark matter density distribution is given as
ρ(R) =
R (1 + R)2 ,
where R = r/rs, for the dark matter scale radius rs,
and ρs is the characteristic density given as ρs = δcρcrit.
The parameter δc deﬁnes the characteristic density and
depends on the concentration parameter c, where c =
R200/rs and
δc = 200
log(1 + c) −c/(1 + c).
The critical density of the universe, ρcrit is taken at its
z = 0 value. The virial radius is deﬁned as R200, or the
point at which the average density of the halo is 200 ρcrit
(Bryan & Norman 1998). Parameter values deﬁning the
dark matter proﬁle are given in Table 1, taking H =
70 km s−1 Mpc−1. The dark matter potential from the
NFW distribution in Equation (1) is
φNF W (R) = −φNFW
log(1 + R)
where the constant φNF W
= 4πGρsr2
An isother-
mal gas in hydrostatic equilibrium with the potential

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Table 1. Dark Matter Properties of Dwarf Galaxy Models
Property
Value
MDM(r < 300 pc)
7.3 × 106 M⊙
M200
3.1 × 108 M⊙
R200
13.70 kpc
795 pc
1.69 × 10−24 g cm−3
ρcrit(z = 0)
9.74 × 10−30 g cm−3
in Equation (3) follows the density distribution
ρ(R) = ρo exp
−CgasφNFW
1 −log (1 + R)
where Cgas = µmp/(kBTdwarf), with mp the mass of
a proton, kB Boltzman’s constant, and µ is the mean
molecular mass; µ = 1.31 for the dwarf galaxy gas. In
all models, the gas distribution is truncated at some
speciﬁed radius, rgas, given in Table 2..
The dark matter potential is deﬁned given the dark
matter mass, MDM (< rDM), interior to some radius
and rs. We ﬁx the radial extent of the gas proﬁle in each
simulation and require pressure equilibrium between the
ambient halo medium and the edge of the dwarf galaxy.
This is obtained by ﬁxing the hot halo number den-
sity and modifying the temperature to establish ther-
mal equilibrium. With these conditions, the gas proﬁle
of the dwarf galaxy is described by additionally setting
no, rgas, Tgas, and nhalo (see Table 2 and Section 3).
Therefore, the halo temperature, Thalo, and the dwarf’s
total gas mass, Mgas, depend on the values of these pa-
rameters.
We discuss our parameter choices in more
detail in Section 3.
2.2. Numerical Methods
We use the Eulerian, grid-based, adaptive mesh re-
ﬁnement code FLASH v4.2 (Fryxell et al. 2000) for
our simulations.
FLASH is a multi-dimensional hy-
drodynamics code that includes multiple solvers.
choose to use the Godunov based, Roe-type, split solver
to approximately solve the Riemann equations. The gas
in our simulations obeys a polytropic equation of state
with ﬁxed adiabatic index γ = 5/3. Most previous work
on gas loss processes for dwarf galaxy satellites has used
either two-dimensional grid codes (e.g. Mori & Burk-
ert 2000; Gatto et al. 2013), or smooth particle hydro-
dynamics (e.g. Mayer et al. 2006); few have employed
a three-dimensional grid-based code (e.g Salem et al.
2015). Our simulations are all run in three dimensions
at high resolution.
To prevent numerical errors from shocks colliding
with the simulation boundaries, our dwarf galaxies are
placed in a large 20×10×10 kpc rectangular box on a
128×64×64 root grid. This corresponds to a base reso-
lution of 156.25 pc. The dwarf is centered 2 kpc from the
left, inﬂowing boundary in the center of a high resolu-
tion region of the domain where we enforce a minimum
of 3 levels of reﬁnement to a resolution of 39.06 pc, and
allow up to 5 levels of reﬁnement at our ﬁducial resolu-
tion to 9.77 pc. We discuss the eﬀects of resolution on
our results with a resolution study in Section 5.3.
The high resolution region is centered on the dwarf
galaxy with a side length of 1.7 kpc, or 100 pc plus
4 times the initial dwarf gas radius.
This limits the
amount of stripped tail we fully resolve but saves sub-
stantial computing time. We performed tests extending
this high resolution box an additional 1.5 kpc down-
stream of the dwarf galaxy. This did not aﬀect the re-
covered stripping time in any of the test cases.
If it
does occur, our initial (1.7 kpc)3 high resolution box is
suﬃcient to capture any re-accretion of stripped gas.
Our analysis of these simulations makes extensive use
of the yt analysis toolkit (Turk et al. 2011). We note
that our simulation outputs have a time resolution of 10
Myr.
2.3. Radiative Cooling
Radiative cooling plays an important role in the
physics of gas stripping. Including radiative cooling can
weaken gas removal due to RPS by more quickly dissi-
pating heating from the initial shock wave. This results
in a comparatively cooler and denser ISM that takes
longer to strip when compared to runs without radia-
tive cooling (Mayer et al. 2006).
However, Tonnesen
& Bryan (2009) found that radiative cooling can in-
crease the stripping rate in their disk galaxy simulations,
though the total amount of stripped gas remained com-
parable. In the gaseous wake of the galaxy undergoing
stripping, cooling can increase fragmentation, forming
dense clumps that can fall back onto the galaxy (Mayer
et al. 2006). It is unclear which of these eﬀects will dom-
inate in any given situation, and therefore what the net
result of including cooling will be, but it does play an
important role in the stripping evolution.
We include the eﬀects of radiative cooling in our sim-
ulations following the method described by Joung &
Mac Low (2006) and Joung et al. (2009).
The cool-
ing function, Λ(T), follows the radiative cooling curve
from Sutherland & Dopita (1993) at T > 2 × 104 K,
assuming an optically thin plasma at cosmic abundance
(Z/Z⊙= 1) and equilibrium ionization. For low temper-
atures, T ≤2×104 K, cooling is adopted from Dalgarno
& McCray (1972), assuming an ionization fraction of
10−2. In the presence of realistic distributed photoelec-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

tric heating, this cooling curve would yield a thermally
stable regime at 104K ≤T < 1.7×104 K (see Figure 1 of
Joung & Mac Low 2006). Gas below 104 K would cool
until the next thermally stable regime at around 40 K.
However, we instead adopt the common practice of using
a cooling ﬂoor as a simple means to mimic the eﬀects of
a distributed heating rate within the ISM of the dwarf
galaxy, preventing runaway overcooling of gas within the
galaxy without having to explicitly model heating from
various sources such as photoionization and photoelec-
tric heating from stars and heating from a metagalactic
UV background. This ﬂoor is set to the initial gas tem-
perature of the dwarf galaxies, Tmin = Tgas.
2.4. Supernova Feedback
Our simulations adopt a supernova implementation
used previously to model the turbulent evolution of the
ISM (Joung & Mac Low 2006; Joung et al. 2009; Hill
et al. 2012). We summarize the method of energy injec-
tion here, as implemented previously, and discuss our
implementation of the core collapse and Type Ia su-
pernova rates. Each supernova explosion, regardless of
type, injects 1051 ergs of thermal energy into the volume
surrounding the supernova’s location. To prevent over-
cooling, we choose the mass of the heated gas to be small
enough to ensure that the initial temperature lies above
106 K, near the minimum in the cooling curve.
energy is injected into the spherical region surrounding
the supernova location that encompasses 60 M⊙of gas.
In our simulations, supernova have minimum radii of at
least 7 pc, up to about 20-30 pc; supernovae occur in our
simulations with typical radii around 10 – 14 pc.Within
this volume, the ∼60 M⊙of gas is distributed evenly
across the aﬀected grid cells. The 1051 ergs are injected
over a uniform density distribution in this region.
Our simulations contain no explicit star formation,
and therefore no star particles to determine supernova
locations and times. Instead, we implement two sepa-
rate methods for determining the Type Ia and core col-
lapse supernova rates. Type Ia supernovae can occur
during and well after periods of star formation in galax-
ies. To account for this, we implement a constant Type
Ia supernova rate based on a two component delay-time
function from Sullivan et al. (2006). The supernova rate
is given as
RIa = AM∗(t) + B ˙M∗(t)
where M∗(t) is the total stellar mass of the galaxy at
a given time, and
˙M∗(t) is the star formation rate at a
given time. Sullivan et al. (2006) ﬁnds A = 5.3 ± 1.1
× 10−14 (Ho/70)2 SNe yr−1 M−1
⊙and B = 3.9 ± 0.7 ×
10−4 (Ho/70)2 SNe yr−1 (M⊙yr−1)−1. We compute M∗
for each of our galaxies by scaling to Leo T’s M∗/Mgas
ratio, 0.43 (Ryan-Weber et al. 2008); and we use Equa-
tion (6) below to compute
˙M∗. The computed, initial
value of RIa is used for the entire simulation, with a su-
pernova occurring every τIa = 1/RIa. The location of
the supernova is chosen randomly with an exponentially
decreasing probability using a scale radius equal to the
adopted stellar extent (see Section 3 for more details),
centered on the initial center of the dwarf galaxy and
truncated at the dwarf’s initial gas radius.
Short lived, massive stars are the progenitors of core
collapse supernovae, so the core collapse rate should cor-
relate with star formation in the dwarf galaxy and, by
extension, the cold gas content of the galaxy. Since we
do not have explicit star formation, we estimate the
core collapse supernova rate using the amount of cold
gas bound to the galaxy at a given time. Given that
the probability of a supernova occurring in a given time
step is RII × dt, we use a random number generator to
determine whether or not a supernova should occur. We
follow a similar method to Gatto et al. (2013) to deter-
mine this rate. The Kennicutt-Schmidt law for galaxies
(Kennicutt 1998), extended to low surface densities (<
10 M⊙pc−2) in Roychowdhury et al. (2009), is given as
ΣSFR = (2.13 ± 0.6) × 10−5Σ2.47
gas ,
where ΣSFR is given in units of M⊙yr−1 kpc−2 and
Σgas in units of M⊙pc−2. We compute the total cold
gas surface density in our galaxy at each time step to
obtain the star formation rate of the galaxy.
This is
translated to a supernova rate by assuming a Salpeter
IMF (Salpeter 1955) using
RII ≃6 × 10−3
M⊙yr−1 SFR yr−1,
where SFR is in units of M⊙yr−1. If a core collapse su-
pernova occurs, its position is determined by randomly
sampling an exponentially decreasing probability distri-
bution centered on the galaxy center and cut oﬀat some
radius r∗, where r∗< rgas, or 300 pc (Table 2). In ad-
dition, we require that the supernova occurs within a
region of cold gas (T < 2 × 104 K), redrawing a ran-
dom position until this condition is met. In general, the
Type II supernova rate is a factor of several higher than
the initial Type Ia supernova rate in our galaxies. How-
ever, while the Type II supernovae dominate initially,
Type Ia supernovae become the dominant (though infre-
quent) source of supernova energy injection during the
later evolution of the dwarfs, once a substantial amount
of cold gas has been stripped.
2.5. Hot Halo Density
Direct observational constraints on the MW’s hot halo
are limited, probed primarily by O VII and O VIII X-ray
absorption lines (Miller & Bregman 2013, 2015, MB13

--- PAGE BREAK ---

and MB15).
These observations are conducted along
a limited number of sightlines, but constrain the ra-
dial distribution of the MW’s hot gas to a beta model
(Makino et al. 1998), which has a power law decay at
large radii.
Theoretical constraints on the MW’s hot
halo have been found using RPS arguments for Carina,
Ursa Minor, Sculptor, and Fornax dSph’s (Grcevich &
Putman 2009, GP09), hydrodynamic stripping simula-
tions of Carina and Sextans (Gatto et al. 2013), and
stripping simulations of the LMC (Salem et al. 2015).
We plot these constraints in Figure 1 along with a model
for the hot halo of the MW developed from hydrody-
namic simulations of disk galaxies (Kaufmann et al.
2009).
We note the ram pressure arguments provide
upper limits and are generally well above the observed
proﬁle.
We use a constant wind density and velocity through-
out this work. The temperature of the oncoming wind
is set by requiring thermal pressure equilibrium between
the halo medium and the edge of the dwarf galaxy. This
means our wind’s thermal properties may be inconsis-
tent with the halo of the MW, but this is suﬃcient for
our purposes as wind temperature does not aﬀect the
stripping rate (Roediger & Hensler 2005; Tonnesen &
Bryan 2009; Salem et al. 2015). We choose a wind num-
ber density of nhalo = 10−4 cm−3 for our simulations, in
agreement with the constraints provided by Salem et al.
(2015) at r ∼50 kpc, but slightly below the upper limit
constraints from GP09.
This density corresponds to pericenter distances of
20 – 30 kpc based on the proﬁles from MB13 and MB15.
Most of the MW hot halo volume has a density lower
than this value. In preliminary tests we ran our simula-
tions with wind densities of 10−3 cm−3 and 10−5 cm−3
and found that the former produces very rapid stripping
in about 0.5 – 1.5 Gyr. The stripping time for the latter,
as extrapolated from 2 Gyr of simulation time, is a Hub-
ble time or more. Number densities higher than about
10−4 cm−3 could be reached by orbits that bring the
dwarf very close to the MW. We note, however, at this
point is is highly likely that tidal stripping may domi-
nate the evolution of the dwarf, possibly completely de-
stroying the satellite.
2.6. Wind Tunnel
We use wind tunnel simulations in order to mimic the
dwarf’s motion through its host’s hot halo. This allows
us to achieve high resolution, allowing us to study these
low mass dwarfs without simulating both the entirety
of the MW disk or the large volume its orbit would
occupy. This has the advantage of both reducing the
computational cost of these simulations and allowing us
to isolate and examine only the gas stripping physics.
Use of wind tunnel simulations to study gas stripping is
Figure 1. Current observational constraints on the number
density proﬁle of the MW’s hot halo from Miller & Bregman
(2013) (black, MB13) and Miller & Bregman (2015) (black,
dash-dotted, MB15).
We also include a theoretical model
from Kaufmann et al. (2009) (purple, K09), and constraints
from both analytic ram pressure stripping arguments with
MW dSph’s from GP09 (blue, circle), simulations of dSph’s
from Gatto et al. (2013) (orange, square, G13), and simula-
tions of the LMC from Salem et al. (2015) (black, diamond,
S15).
standard practice for both massive galaxies and dwarf
galaxies (e.g. Mayer et al. 2006; Gatto et al. 2013; Salem
et al. 2015). We use a constant wind density and velocity
throughout our simulations for better control over the
stripping process without having to model variations in
cosmologically realistic orbits.
With constant density
and velocity, our simulations are equivalent to a dwarf
satellite on a circular orbit. Alternatively, since a ma-
jority of stripping occurs during pericenter of a given
orbit, our simulations can be thought of as examining
how long a dwarf would have to spend at a given peri-
center radius and velocity to be stripped. We test two
speeds, vwind = 200 km s−1 and vwind = 400 km s−1,
directed from the left edge of the simulation box with
only a positive x velocity component.
3. SIMULATION INITIAL CONDITIONS
We focus on stripping and feedback in the lowest mass
dwarf satellites around the MW, a previously unexplored
regime in simulations studying gas stripping. To do this
we use observationally motivated initial conditions for
our dwarf galaxies. Rather than taking a present day
dSph and determining the gas, stellar, and dark mat-
ter properties of its pre-infall progenitor, we instead use
initial conditions mimicking a current, gaseous low mass
satellite of the MW, Leo T. We note that our initial con-
ditions are not meant to be an exact ﬁt to the observed
gas and dark matter properties of this galaxy. Leo T is
located at ∼420 kpc and was the ﬁrst ultrafaint dwarf
galaxy detected around the MW (Irwin et al. 2007). It
contains both an old stellar population, 6-8 Gyr, and a

--- PAGE BREAK ---

young population, 200 Myr, suggesting ongoing star for-
mation. It has an observed HI mass interior to 300 pc of
MHI = 2.8 × 105 M⊙, a stellar mass of M∗= 1.2 × 105
M⊙, and a low star formation rate of 1.5 −2 × 10−5 M⊙
yr−1 (Ryan-Weber et al. 2008). The initial conditions
for our two simulated dwarf models are outlined below.
In this work, we ﬁx the dark matter halo for each
of our dwarf galaxies, implemented as a static, non-
evolving gravitational potential in our simulations; these
properties are given in Table 1. Our adopted dark mat-
ter mass MDM(r < 300 pc) = 7.3 × 106 M⊙is consis-
tent with and bracketed by measurements from Ryan-
Weber et al. (2008), MDM > 3.3 × 106 M⊙, and Stri-
gari et al. (2008), MDM = 1.30+0.88
−0.42 × 107 M⊙, and
consistent with ﬁts from Faerman et al. (2013) with
MDM = 6.5 × 106 M⊙for an NFW proﬁle ﬁt, and
MDM = 8.0 × 106 M⊙for a Burkert proﬁle ﬁt.
adopt rs = 795 pc following Walker et al. (2009), as
determined from NFW proﬁle ﬁts to 8 MW dSph’s.
We test two diﬀerent models for the dwarf galaxy gas
proﬁles that are diﬀerentiated by their central gas den-
sity, set to either no = 0.75 cm−3 or no = 1.50 cm−3.
Each dwarf contains an isothermal gas distribution at
Tdwarf = 6000 K with an initial gas extent of 300 pc.
We note that the resulting peak (central) column den-
sity of gas in these two models is 1.76 × 1020 cm−2and
3.52 × 1020 cm−2 respectively. Leo T has an observed
peak NHI of 7 × 1020 cm−2 (Ryan-Weber et al. 2008).
Thus the gas in our dwarfs is generally more diﬀuse than
in Leo T.
The total gas mass of the dwarf, 2.34 × 105 M⊙or
4.74 × 105 M⊙(Table 2), is determined by these values,
by requiring that the dwarf be in hydrostatic equilib-
rium with its dark matter potential, and by requiring
that the edge be in pressure equilibrium with the sur-
rounding gaseous halo. Since we ﬁx the density of the
gaseous halo, we ﬁnd this latter condition by changing
the halo temperature; Thalo = 2.9×106 K and 3.9×106 K
for the no = 0.75 cm−3 and 1.50 cm−3 dwarfs respec-
tively. To compute the supernova locations and rates,
we must assume some stellar properties of our dwarf
galaxy. We again note that we do not include star for-
mation nor the gravitational eﬀect due to a stellar pop-
ulation. We assume instead a stellar radius like Leo T’s
of r∗= 170 pc (McConnachie 2012); this is used as the
truncation radius in choosing the supernova locations.
We use M∗/Mgas = 0.43 (Ryan-Weber et al. 2008) for
Leo T to set M∗in each dwarf to determine the their
constant Type Ia supernova rates.
These parameters
and the resulting supernova rates are given in Table 2.
Figure 2 gives the initial gas and dark matter density
proﬁles for each of our two dwarf galaxies.
4. RESULTS
Figure 2.
Initial gas density (colored, left axis) and dark
matter density (dashed, right axis) proﬁles for the two dwarf
galaxy models. The proﬁle and total gas mass interior to rgas
= 300 pc are shown for the no = 0.75 cm−3 (green) and no
= 1.50 cm−3 (blue) dwarf galaxies, as well as the total dark
matter mass interior to 300 pc (black). These properties are
summarized in Tables 1 and 2.
Figure 3 shows density slices at four diﬀerent times
during the simulations, comparing the evolution of the
two diﬀerent dwarf galaxies at the two diﬀerent wind
velocities. We show the evolution of the cold gas mass
gravitationally bound to the dwarf galaxy over time in
Figure 4. The solid black lines in Figure 4 correspond to
the density slices in Figure 3. The total stripping time
and fraction of cold gas remaining at 2 Gyr are presented
in Table 3 for each of the lines in Figure 4. We use a
linear extrapolation from the mass loss over 1.9 – 2.0
Gyr to estimate the stripping time for simulations that
still contain gas at 2 Gyr.
Stripping in ≲2 Gyr only occurs in the vwind = 400
km s−1 simulations, with the no = 1.50 cm−3 runs tak-
ing just slightly more than 2 Gyr to strip.
The ex-
trapolated stripping time for the vwind = 200 km s−1
simulations, however, ranges between about 4 – 7 Gyr;
much longer than the 2 Gyr timescale. This signiﬁcant
diﬀerence in stripping behaviors between the wind ve-
locities is understandable, as the ram pressure force ex-
perienced by these galaxies scales as velocity squared
(Pram ∝ρwindv2
wind). In each of these simulations, the
stripping rate is fairly low, with a roughly uniform strip-
ping rate over the entire simulation.
This generally
agrees with the picture of stripping developed in sim-
ulations of disk galaxies, where a majority of the evo-
lution time is spent undergoing slow stripping, rather
than dominated by rapid, impulsive stripping (Marcolini
et al. 2003; Roediger & Hensler 2005; Weinberg 2014).
We conﬁrm this in adiabatic simulations of these dwarf

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Figure 3. Selected density slices at four times for a subset of our simulations, each of the solid black lines in Figure 4. The left
two columns give the no = 0.75 cm−3 galaxy run with supernova at the two wind velocities used, while the right columns show
the corresponding no = 1.50 cm−3 simulations. In this orientation, the wind is inﬂowing from the bottom of each box. We note
that these 2 kpc × 2.6 kpc panels only show a subset of the full simulation volume.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Table 2. Dwarf Galaxy Gas and Feedback Properties
no (cm−3)
rgas (pc)
Mgas (105 M⊙)
Tgas (K)
r∗(pc)
SFRa (10−6 M⊙yr−1)
τSN,1a
b (Myr)
τSN,II
c (Myr)
0.75
300.0
2.37
6.0×103
3.90
42.73
1.50
4.74
21.6
52.1
7.712
aComputed from Equation (6) given Mgas
bFixed rate used in simulation from Equation (5)
cThe estimated initial Type II supernova rate from Equation (7).
Note—These properties determine the initial conditions for each of our dwarf galaxies. The Type Ia supernova rate is
implemented as a constant rate in our simulations, while the Type II rate given is the average expected rate if the dwarf were
to evolve in isolation without a wind.
Figure 4. The gravitationally bound cold gas mass for each dwarf galaxy run over the 2 Gyr simulation time. For each dwarf
model, we run a supernova (black, solid, slices shown in Figure 3) and no supernova simulation (black, dashed). We additionally
run 3 simulations for the vwind = 400 km s−1 galaxies where we increase the supernova rate by a factor of 2 (blue, dashed) and
5 (orange, dash-dot). See Table 3 for a list of the obtained and extrapolated stripping times for each simulation.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Table 3. Stripping Timescales
no cm−3
v (km s−1)
SN Use
fgas at 2 Gyr
τstrip
a (Myr)
0.75
No SN
0.56
(4100)
0.57
(4320)
No SN
1440
1340
SN × 2
1220
1.50
No SN
0.73
(6880)
0.74
(7350)
No SN
0.22
(2480)
0.10
(2240)
SN × 2
0.08
(2270)
SN × 5
1830
aValues in parenthesis are linear extrapolations
Note—Given is the fraction of cold gas bound to the dwarf
galaxy at the end of simulation time (2 Gyr) along with the
stripping timescale if stripped within this time. If fgas > 0,
we give a parenthesized stripping timescale extrapolated
from the last 100 Myr of the simulation.
galaxies (no radiative cooling and no supernovae) which
exhibit a short, initial period of rapid stripping, followed
by continuous, low level stripping through the remainder
of the simulation.
For these runs, the gas stripping is minimally aﬀected
by the inclusion of supernova feedback. This is a diﬀer-
ent outcome than is seen in massive, disk galaxy simula-
tions, where including supernova feedback plays an im-
portant role in driving out gas from the galaxy, assisting
stripping. We ﬁnd here that the supernova rate in these
galaxy models is so small, that they only play a minimal
role in amplifying the gas stripping rate. We performed
three additional tests with supernova (blue and orange/
dotted and dot-dashed lines) where we multiplied the
Type II supernova rate by a constant factor (2 or 5),
leaving the Type Ia supernovae at the original rate. The
SN × 2 runs still show little diﬀerence in evolution until
the very end of the simulation. Only the SN × 5 run
shows a signiﬁcant impact on the gas stripping evolu-
tion. Based on visual inspection, the normal supernova
rate is infrequent enough that the gas is able to dissi-
pate most of the injected energy from a given supernova
before the next one explodes. It is only when the super-
nova rate increases to the point that multiple supernova
contribute to a common superbubble that they are able
to drive out gas and assist stripping.
5. DISCUSSION
Here we focus on the role of supernova driven feedback
in gas stripping in these dwarf galaxies in Section 5.1 and
reconcile the stripping timescales seen in our simulations
with the expected stripping timescales of observed, low
mass dSph’s in Section 5.2. Finally, we include a reso-
lution study in Section 5.3.
5.1. Ineﬃciencies of Supernova Feedback in Low Mass
Dwarfs
Our simulations demonstrate that the supernova feed-
back in the lowest mass dwarf galaxies is a minor factor
in the gas removal process.
The star formation rates
computed for our dwarf galaxy models are too low to
produce enough supernovae to drive substantial out-
ﬂows. This appears to be because the dwarf’s gas has
enough time to dissipate the injected supernova energy
by the time another occurs. Stacking the eﬀects of mul-
tiple supernovae seems to be necessary to drive outﬂows
and aﬀect the gas stripping evolution.
Although Mac Low & Ferrara (1999) showed low mass
dwarf galaxies (Mgas ∼106 M⊙) can be completely de-
stroyed with enough supernova feedback, the supernova
rates in our dwarfs are over an order of magnitude be-
low the lowest rate sampled in that work, the lowest of
which exhibited a mass ejection fraction of only 20%.
Our results agree with Mac Low & Ferrara (1999), in
that low mass dwarfs cannot drive large outﬂows from
weak supernova feedback. The Carina dwarf galaxy sim-
ulations (Mgas = 6.3 × 105 M⊙) in Gatto et al. (2013)
also have too low a supernova rate to aﬀect the gas
stripping process. The two lowest mass dwarfs in the
Shen et al. (2014) simulation sample have stellar masses
of 9.6 × 104 M⊙and 5.3 × 105 M⊙, and are unable to
drive large outﬂows. However, it appears that the larger
star formation and supernova rates in more massive
dwarf galaxies, in spite of a deeper potential well, drive
stronger outﬂows (Shen et al. 2014; Caproni et al. 2015).
This is seen also in Gatto et al. (2013), where feedback
does play an important role in modifying the stripping
rate of their Sextans simulations (Mgas = 7.0×106 M⊙).
The lack of observed quenched, isolated dwarf galaxies
coupled with their long gas consumption timescales sug-
gests that environmental stripping is necessary for com-
plete gas removal and quenching of dwarf galaxies (Geha
et al. 2012).
Though the exact signiﬁcance of feedback driven
winds in a given galaxy is dependent on the gas geom-
etry, the star formation rate and distribution of star
forming regions within the galaxy, and depth of the
galaxy’s potential well (Mac Low & Ferrara 1999), we
further add to the picture of environmental quenching
of dwarf galaxies by ﬁnding that gas removal in the low-
est mass dwarf galaxies must be due to environmental
eﬀects alone.
5.2. Reconciling Ineﬃcient Stripping with the Expected
Stripping Timescale

--- PAGE BREAK ---

There has been much recent work examining the
quenching processes of dwarf galaxy satellites around
the MW and M31 both observationally and theoretically
(e.g. Geha et al. 2012; Karachentsev et al. 2013; Brooks
et al. 2013; Weisz et al. 2015; Wetzel et al. 2015b; Dea-
son et al. 2015; Wetzel et al. 2015a; Fillingham et al.
2015; Wheeler et al. 2014; Phillips et al. 2014, 2015;
Slater & Bell 2013, 2014; Slater et al. 2015). Most of
this work, however, has focused on dwarf galaxy stellar
masses of 108 −1010 M⊙where observations indicate
that quenching is a highly ineﬃcient process for both
satellite and ﬁeld galaxies.
At these masses, roughly
20 – 40% of observed satellite galaxies are quenched,
suggesting quenching timescales around 6 – 9 Gyr. For
galaxies of lower stellar mass, about 80% are quenched
at around M∗= 106 M⊙, and all are quenched for
masses down to M∗= 105 M⊙.
Studies examining
the observed quenched fraction for these low mass dwarf
galaxies (the focus of our work), coupled with accretion
histories derived from cosmological dark matter simula-
tions (Slater & Bell 2014; Wetzel et al. 2015b; Fillingham
et al. 2015) suggest eﬃcient quenching timescales, ≤2
Gyr. Environmental gas stripping is generally assumed
as the quenching mechanism for these dwarf galaxies
(e.g. Wheeler et al. 2014; Slater & Bell 2014).
How-
ever, our work suggests that gas stripping alone, even in
combination with internal feedback, is ineﬃcient in the
cases we consider and cannot universally quench galax-
ies within the expected 2 Gyr time frame.
Our vwind = 400 km s−1 simulations have stripping
timescales in the range of 1.5 – 2.2 Gyr, comparable
to the derived 2 Gyr quenching time. However, this is
an optimistic stripping time given that we use a con-
stant 400 km s−1 wind for the entire 2 Gyr simula-
tion.
This overestimates stripping in a galaxy with
vperi = 400 km s−1 as a realistic orbit would not re-
sult in these wind velocities (or wind densities) for this
long. For dwarfs with lower eﬀective average velocities,
like our vwind = 200 km s−1 simulations, the situation
becomes more problematic. These simulations suggest
additional physics may be required, beyond what is con-
sidered in this work, in order to understand the large
quenched fraction of low mass dwarf galaxies.
Although we ﬁnd that relying on gas stripping and
feedback alone to quench every case of these low mass
dwarfs is problematic, these are not the only physical
processes that can aﬀect quenching in low mass dwarf
satellites of the MW. Tidal interactions between the
dwarf and the MW, for example, are often not consid-
ered and may be important in the quenching process.
We investigate and discuss the role these eﬀects may
have in the quenching of these low mass dwarf galaxies
below.
5.2.1. Stripping Under a Weakened Potential
Recent studies of the kinematics of dwarf galaxies in
the Local Group suggest that the dark matter density
proﬁles of dwarfs may contain central cores (e.g. Oh
et al. 2011) rather than the cuspy proﬁles expected (see
de Blok (2010) for a recent observational review). As-
suming galaxies initially contain cuspy proﬁles, the most
likely mechanism of core formation is the gravitational
heating of dark matter in the centers of these galaxies
through gas motions produced by supernova feedback
(e.g. Zolotov et al. 2012; Arraki et al. 2014; Pontzen &
Governato 2014; Pontzen et al. 2015; Nipoti & Binney
2015; Di Cintio et al. 2014b; Ogiya & Burkert 2015; Read
et al. 2016). Core formation through this mechanism
is dependent upon the stellar-to-halo mass fraction (Di
Cintio et al. 2014b); too low and feedback is too weak
to aﬀect the dark matter distribution, too high and the
stars dominate the potential in the centers of the galaxy,
preventing the heating of the dark matter. We note here
that our Leo T-like models, with M∗= 1.2×105 M⊙and
M200 = 3.1 × 108 M⊙, likely have too little supernova
feedback to produce signiﬁcant cores (Di Cintio et al.
2014a,b).
In our simulations we assume a cuspy, NFW dark mat-
ter potential for each dwarf. If cores were to form in
these galaxies, it would weaken the gravitational poten-
tial and may lead to more rapid stripping. To test this
hypothesis, we re-run two no = 1.50 cm−3 simulations
with supernova feedback using a cored, Burkert (1995)
proﬁle instead of a NFW proﬁle. The proﬁle was con-
structed such that it contained the same total gas and
dark matter mass interior to 300 pc as our NFW galax-
ies, with the same central gas density. We present the
results of these two simulations in Figure 5 (dashed)
compared to the equivalent models from Figure 4 (solid).
We ﬁnd that a cored potential does very little to aﬀect
the overall evolution at either wind velocity. The ex-
pected stripping times for the vwind = 200 km s−1 and
vwind = 400 km s−1 simulations are 7.0 Gyr and 2.2 Gyr
respectively for the Burkert proﬁles, and 7.4 Gyr and 2.2
Gyr respectively for the NFW proﬁles.
5.2.2. Tidal Eﬀects from the Milky Way
Our simulations neglect tidal eﬀects the MW might
have on gas stripping.
They may weaken the stellar
and dark matter potentials of our dwarf galaxy, decreas-
ing the stripping timescale. However, the signiﬁcance
of tides strongly depends upon the nature of the dwarf
galaxy’s orbit and its pericenter distance; being most
signiﬁcant for orbits that plunge deep into the MW po-
tential. Our assumed halo density of 10−4 cm−3 corre-
sponds to orbital pericenters around 30 kpc, as seen in
Figure 1. Taking the simple scaling relation for the tidal
radius (Johnston 1998) rt as a function of satellite mass

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Figure 5. Evolution of bound cold gas mass remaining over time. Both models have the same initial gas and dark matter mass
within 300 pc, and central gas densities, no = 1.50 cm−3. The solid lines give the evolution for a cuspy NFW proﬁle, and dashed
for a cored Burkert proﬁle. The latter results in a lower virial mass and overall smaller potential well than the NFW proﬁle,
but only reduces the stripping time marginally.
m, host mass M, and orbital pericenter rp
rt =
1/3
the tidal radius is about 3 kpc for rp = 30 kpc and
MMW = 1012 M⊙. Since including tidal eﬀects in de-
tail is not possible in our wind tunnel simulations, we
approximate tidal interactions by assuming the dark
matter distribution of our dwarf galaxy is truncated at
r ≥rt and unaﬀected at r < rt.
The reduction in
gravitational potential over r < 2 rgas, or 600 pc, for
our dwarfs is roughly uniform at ∼20% of the origi-
nal.
We use this reduction to approximately account
for tidal stripping in our simulations by re-running our
no = 1.50 cm−3 supernova simulations with a constant
20% reduction applied to the dark matter potential. We
run an additional simulation using rp = 100 kpc, cor-
responding to a 10% reduction in the gravitational po-
tential over r < 2 rgas. We note these simulations were
not initially in hydrostatic equilibrium, as they were run
with the original gas initial conditions in spite of the
reduced potential. However, we do not expect this ap-
proximation to signiﬁcantly aﬀect the results, and in any
case it will at least give us a lower limit on the stripping
timescale.
The results of this test are shown in Figure 6, with
rp = 100 kpc (dashed) and rp = 30 kpc (dotted) as
compared to the original simulations (solid) shown in
4. As expected, the weakened potentials result in faster
stripping in each case.
The eﬀect is unable to bring
the stripping timescales for the v = 200 km s−1 simu-
lation under 2 Gyr, but is signiﬁcant. The new strip-
ping timescales are 3.5 and 5.0 Gyr for the rp = 30 kpc
and rp = 100 kpc simulations respectively. A compa-
rable fractional decrease is seen in the v = 400 km s−1
simulation, yet in this case the tidal eﬀects can reduce
stripping to below 2 Gyr, at 1.3 and 1.8 Gyr respec-
tively. Although they may not be relevant in every case,
this suggests that accounting for tidal eﬀects between
the MW and the infalling dwarf galaxy can be impor-
tant. Including tidal forces between host and satellite
in detail is thus an important area of future study, par-
ticularly in capturing cosmologically motivated satellite
orbits. Doing so in a cosmological simulation to capture
a statistical sample of low mass dwarfs and their orbits
is particularly attractive. However, this becomes com-
putationally expensive as it would require the ability to
simulate a massive MW-like host galaxy in tandem with
its satellites in a hydrodynamic simulation. Although
simulations like this have been done focusing on more
massive satellites (e.g. Mayer et al. 2006), this is a chal-
lenging prospect when the mass of the satellites we are
concerned with, M∗∼105 M⊙, are roughly six orders
of magnitude smaller than that of the MW.
5.2.3. Cosmological Orbits and the Halo Density
We have presented a series of wind tunnel simulations
at ﬁxed wind velocity and wind density. In reality, dwarf
satellites travel along cosmological orbits encountering
a range of wind velocities and densities. Since RPS at
pericenter passage dominates, where PRPS = ρwindv2
peaks, stripping in real dwarfs is more impulsive than

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Figure 6. Approximate eﬀects of tidal stripping by the MW on our no = 1.5 cm−3 galaxy. We examined the tidal stripping
radius for two pericenter distances, 30 kpc and 100 kpc, dashed and dotted respectively, corresponding to rtidal of 5.6 kpc (0.41
Rvir)and 9.4 kpc (0.69 Rvir) respectively. Assuming the galaxy is unaﬀected at r < rt, we compute the resulting change in the
depth of the potential in each case within 2Rgas, or 600 pc. We took the mean change of the potential in each case, which was
nearly linear and constant over this range, and re-ran our simulations with a reduced background potential and same initial
conditions.
the continual cases we examine here.
It is unclear
whether or not this will make stripping more or less eﬃ-
cient in a given case. We consider here the universality
of our adopted PRPS compared to expected peak PRPS
inferred for satellites of MW mass systems.
Slater & Bell (2014) consider accretion histories of
subhalos in the Via Lactea 1 and 2 dark matter only
simulations to estimate the peak PRPS felt by MW sub-
halos assuming the Miller & Bregman (2013) hot halo
density proﬁle shown in Figure 1. If RPS is the dominant
quenching mechanism, quenching 90% of MW satellites,
they consider the peak PRPS felt by 90% or more of the
Via Lactea halos, calculated as 10−14.8 dyne cm−2. This
value can be interpreted to mean that if RPS is the sole
cause of gas quenching in MW satellites, it must operate
eﬃciently down to the given PRPS. PRPS for our sim-
ulations is 10−13.4 dyne cm−2 and 10−12.79 dyne cm−2
for the 200 km s−1 and 400 km s−1 wind velocities re-
spectively. Our values correspond to the PRPS felt by at
least ∼75% and ∼50% of the subhalos in Slater & Bell
(2014) respectively. Although RPS operates impulsively
in satellites with realistic orbits, the time spent at peri-
center in a given orbit is on the order of a few hundred
Myr, far shorter than the 2 Gyr in our simulations. We
expect, then, that our simulations set lower limits for
the stripping timescale at the given PRPS. Based on the
peak PRPS models from Slater & Bell (2014), we argue
that at least 25% of subhalos do not experience suﬃcient
PRPS for eﬃcient quenching, and only at most 50% ex-
perience strong enough peak PRPS to quench within the
expected timescales. This generally agrees with a simi-
lar analysis presented in Fillingham et al. (2015).
Finally, uncertainties in the MW’s hot halo density are
relevant to the universality of our ﬁndings. If the MW
halo’s density is generally higher or has a more shallow
fall oﬀwith radius than the observations shown in Fig-
ure 1, our work and previous studies would generally
underestimate the typical RPS forces felt by orbiting
satellites. Better observational constraints of the MW’s
halo density proﬁle out to large radii and improved the-
oretical models of hot halos around MW mass galaxies
may help to reconcile the diﬀerences between expected
stripping timescales and those presented here.
5.2.4. Group Pre-processing of Low Mass Dwarfs
Accounting for the complete, cosmological accretion
history of a given dwarf satellite may be necessary to
recover < 2 Gyr quenching timescales. Tracing the in-
fall histories of subhalos in the ELVIS (Garrison-Kimmel
et al. 2014) suite of cosmological N-body simulations
of MW/M31 analogs, Wetzel et al. (2015a) ﬁnds that
a substantial fraction of present day subhalos of MW-
like galaxies were subhalos of a diﬀerent pair or group
prior to or during infall onto the MW. They ﬁnd that
this “group preprocessing” is most prevalent for low
mass dwarfs, M∗≤106 M⊙.
On average, 50% of
these subhalos were preprocessed. Tidal interactions be-
tween dwarfs within these pre-infall groups may play a
signiﬁcant role in the quenching process of these low

--- PAGE BREAK ---

mass galaxies. They may disturb and weaken the dwarf
galaxy potential wells, leading to more eﬃcient stripping
upon infall to the MW. Additionally, tidal stirring may
heat and puﬀup the gas within the dwarf, again leading
to more eﬃcient stripping. Observational and theoreti-
cal work investigating these eﬀects in detail, however, is
currently limited.
Recent work as part of the TiNy Titans study (Stier-
walt et al. 2015) demonstrates that tidal interactions in
dwarf-dwarf pairs drives gas into their outskirts, com-
pared to non-paired dwarf irregulars, as determined by
their HI extent (Pearson et al. 2016). If this puﬃng up
of dwarfs is universal in group preprocessing, it would
result in more eﬃcient stripping upon infall to a more
massive host. Exactly how much this would change the
stripping timescales we ﬁnd is unclear and is an area
worthy of future research.
Identifying observational signatures of preprocessing
of MW satellites (Deason et al. 2015) would be vital to
understanding whether or not it played a role for MW
dwarfs in particular. Future simulation work could also
provide insight into preprocessing. However, doing so
in a full cosmological context would again require ex-
tremely high resolution hydrodynamic simulations that
are able to resolve both these low mass galaxies, M∗
∼105 M⊙, and their massive host at the same time.
Producing such a simulation is additionally attractive
as it would naturally include MW-dwarf tidal interac-
tions post-infall. Although recent work has been able
to resolve low mass satellites (M∗> 103 M⊙) in orbit
around a M∗> 106 M⊙host (Wheeler et al. 2015), this
has yet to be done on the required scales.
5.2.5. Reionization
A ﬁnal possibility is that reionization, rather than
RPS or tidal stripping, is the dominant quenching mech-
anism for low mass dwarf galaxies. This would alleviate
any need for the MW environment to remove gas from
these galaxies.
Inferring infall times from abundance
matching in Rocha et al. (2012), Weisz et al. (2015)
compares these to the quenching times derived from the
SFH’s of MW dwarfs (Weisz et al. 2014a). They ﬁnd
that several galaxies with M∗≤108 M⊙were quenched
prior to infall onto the MW halo. In fact, a few of these
galaxies have been identiﬁed as fossils of reionization
(See Weisz et al. 2014b, and references therein). This
points to reionization, rather than environmental strip-
ping, as the quenching mechanism for low mass MW
dwarfs. Analysis of ELVIS subhalo accretion histories
shows that all subhalos of the MW/M31 analogs were
outside the MW/M31 virial radius during reionization,
and did not enter it until 2 – 4 Gyr later (Wetzel et al.
2015a). These authors suggest that the eﬀects of reion-
ization and the MW environment should be separable in
observations. Distinguishing the eﬀects of reionization
from environmental quenching in these dwarf galaxies
through both observation and simulations would be a
valuable insight into the evolution of MW satellites. In
particular, simulations can answer in detail how reion-
ization aﬀects these galaxies (e.g Simpson et al. 2013;
Ocvirk et al. 2015). However, if reionization is the dom-
inant quenching mechanism for these dwarfs, then it
must also be able to explain why low mass dwarfs like
Leo T and Leo P (Giovanelli et al. 2013; McQuinn et al.
2015), both nearby, low mass dwarfs outside the MW
virial radius, contain gas and show observable star for-
mation.
5.3. Resolution Study
We perform the highest resolution three-dimensional
simulations of dwarf galaxy RPS to date at our ﬁducial
resolution of 9.77 pc. To understand the eﬀect of reso-
lution in ram pressure stripping simulations of this kind
we present a resolution study of the no = 1.50 cm−3
dwarf galaxy at both vwind
200 km s−1 and
vwind
400 km s−1 in Figure 7.
We present two
full low resolution simulations for each, at 39.06 pc and
19.54 pc, and partial runs at 4.89 pc resolution.
Each velocity case shows a large qualitative change
in behavior moving from a resolution of 19.5 to 9.8 pc,
corresponding to a change from ∼15 to ∼31 grid cells
across the galaxy gas radius. In each case, there is appre-
ciable gas stripping at a roughly uniform rate for most of
the 2 Gyr. Moving to higher resolution, 4.9 pc, shows a
quantitative, yet not qualitative change. However, this
change is likely too large to consider our 9.8 pc simula-
tions fully converged. Extrapolating the high resolution
runs to 2 Gyr, we ﬁnd that for a factor of two change
in resolution, there is only a 41.3% and 14.6% change
in the recovered stripping times (Table 3), to 4.31 Gyr
and 1.92 Gyr for the 200 km s−1 and 400 km s−1 runs
respectively.
The qualitative diﬀerence in the behavior moving from
low to high resolution for the two diﬀerent velocities
is likely due to the diﬀerent nature of the gas strip-
ping in each case.
While the 200 km s−1 simulation
is dominated by low level stripping through ﬂuid in-
stabilities, the factor of four increase in ram pressure
force in the 400 km s−1 run leads to more momentum
driven stripping.
Unresolved ﬂuid instabilities in the
lowest resolution 200 km s−1 run lead to no stripping,
but rather gradual accretion onto the galaxy over time.
The low resolution runs in the 400 km s−1 case contain
far too much numerical diﬀusion, allowing the ram pres-
sure force to more eﬃciently strip these low resolution
galaxies.
This study demonstrates that our stripping times are
converging at an acceptable rate in the 200 km s−1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Figure 7. Resolution study using the no = 1.50 cm−3 dwarf galaxy at both vwind = 200 km s−1 (left) and vwind = 400 km s−1
(right). Given is our ﬁducial resolution, 9.77 pc (solid), as compared to two low resolution runs, 19.54 pc (dash-dot) and 39.06 pc
(dot), and a partial simulation at higher resolution, 4.89 pc (dashed).
case, suggesting that our standard resolution represents
a strong upper limit to the result, but one that appears
to be well within a factor of two of the converged result.
On the other hand, the 400 km s−1 case may be con-
verged and showing results of random ﬂuctuations (Ko-
rycansky et al. 2002), so that one should interpret the
result as a ﬁnal value subject to variation of order 10–
20%. At our ﬁducial resolution, each 400 km s−1 simula-
tion to 2 Gyr costs on order of 4000 – 5000 CPU hours,
or about 3 days on 64 cores.1 While this is relatively
inexpensive, the 4.89 pc simulation with a 400 km s−1
wind cost 30,720 CPU hours (10 days, 128 cores) out
to 780 Myr. In total, we estimate the simulations pre-
sented in Figures 4 – 6 would require ∼1.4 million CPU
hours at 4.89 pc resolution. Performing multiple simu-
lations at the resolution required for full convergence is
computationally expensive. We conclude that our qual-
itative result, that ram pressure alone is not responsible
for low mass satellite quenching, remains valid.
6. CONCLUSION
In this work we present a set of simulations examining
the ability of RPS and supernova feedback to remove gas
in the lowest mass dwarf galaxy satellites of the MW
(M∗∼105 M⊙).
In our high resolution wind tunnel
simulations, we demonstrate the surprising diﬃculty of
stripping these galaxies, given reasonable assumptions
1 We note that the 200 km s−1 simulations are about 25%
cheaper than the 400 km s−1 simulations as the slower wind ve-
locity results in a larger average timestep.
for the orbital velocity and density of the MW’s hot
halo. Assuming quenching occurs once the galaxy con-
tains no cold gas, this casts doubt on the ability for RPS
alone or with supernova feedback to quench these galax-
ies on the < 2 Gyr timescales expected for low mass MW
dwarf satellites. We ﬁnd that the expected supernova
rate in these galaxies is too low to eﬀectively inﬂuence
the stripping rate.
We conclude that additional physics must be at play,
operating in addition to gas stripping, in order to quench
these galaxies on relatively short timescales. Tidal strip-
ping eﬀects from interactions between the dwarf and the
MW may play a signiﬁcant role in a fraction of MW
dwarfs, but is strongly dependent upon the particular
orbits and pericenter distances of the dwarf satellites.
In addition, tidal eﬀects during group preprocessing may
play a role in either removing gas before infall onto the
MW, or puﬃng up galaxies, allowing for more eﬃcient
gas stripping.
Finally, re-ionization in the early Uni-
verse may have quenched a substantial fraction of these
low mass dwarfs, obviating the need for invoking envi-
ronmental quenching in the ﬁrst place. However, we do
not yet have a complete understanding of which galaxies
are quenched during re-ionization, which, if any, galax-
ies quenched during re-ionization can re-accrete gas and
form stars, and what these quenched galaxies would look
like at z = 0.
Our results demonstrate that RPS does not univer-
sally dominate quenching in low mass dwarf satellites.
However, this does not mean that RPS is unable to dom-
inate quenching for dwarfs with higher pericenter veloc-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ities, which may also experience higher halo densities.
As shown in Slater & Bell (2014), approximately half of
MW subhalos may have experienced higher RPS forces
than we study here. This estimate is dependent upon
our understanding of the MW’s hot halo density pro-
ﬁle, which requires further observations to be well con-
strained. Modeling each quenching mechanism together
with realistic orbits and a range of halo density proﬁles
to estimate the relative importance of each mechanism
as a function of satellite stellar mass is a fruitful area of
future research.
Disentangling these processes observationally would
contribute to a better understanding of the cosmologi-
cal evolution of the satellites of the MW. In addition, the
relative importance of each of these physical processes
should be examined further in both semi-analytic mod-
els and cosmological hydrodynamics simulations that in-
corporate tidal eﬀects between host and satellite, the
complete accretion history of satellites, group prepro-
cessing, realistic orbits, and the eﬀects of re-ionization
in the early Universe.
Unfortunately, capturing these
physical processes while resolving the lowest mass dwarf
satellites around a MW-like host remains computation-
ally challenging, but can be pursued with current semi-
analytic models.
A.E. is supported by a National Science Founda-
tion Graduate Research Fellowship Grant No.
DGE-
11-44155. M-MML is partly supported by NSF grant
AST11-09395, and the Humboldt Foundation.
holds a Kathryn W. Davis Postdoctoral Fellowship.
AG acknowledges the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft
(DFG) for funding through the SPP 1573 “The Physics
of the Interstellar Medium”.
The FLASH code was
in part developed by the DOE-supported ASC/Alliance
center for Astrophysical Thermonuclear Flashes at the
University of Chicago.
We gratefully recognize com-
putational resources provided by NSF XSEDE through
grant number TG-MCA99S024 and Columbia Univer-
sity. Analysis in this work made signiﬁcant use of the
publicly-available yt (http://yt-project.org) toolkit. yt
is the product of a collaborative eﬀort of many indepen-
dent scientists from numerous institutions around the
world. Their commitment to open science has helped
make this work possible.
Software: FLASH (Fryxell et al. 2000), yt (Turk
et al. 2011)
REFERENCES
Abadi, M. G., Moore, B., & Bower, R. G. 1999, MNRAS, 308,
Abramson, A., Kenney, J. D. P., Crowl, H. H., et al. 2011, AJ,
141, 164
Arraki, K. S., Klypin, A., More, S., & Trujillo-Gomez, S. 2014,
MNRAS, 438, 1466
Bradford, J. D., Geha, M. C., & Blanton, M. R. 2015, ApJ, 809,
Brooks, A. M., Kuhlen, M., Zolotov, A., & Hooper, D. 2013,
ApJ, 765, 22
Brooks, A. M., & Zolotov, A. 2014, ApJ, 786, 87
Bryan, G. L., & Norman, M. L. 1998, ApJ, 495, 80
Burkert, A. 1995, ApJL, 447, L25
Caproni, A., Lanfranchi, G. A., da Silva, A. L., &
Falceta-Gon¸calves, D. 2015, ApJ, 805, 109
Cayatte, V., Kotanyi, C., Balkowski, C., & van Gorkom, J. H.
1994, AJ, 107, 1003
Chung, A., van Gorkom, J. H., Kenney, J. D. P., & Vollmer, B.
2007, ApJL, 659, L115
Creasey, P., Theuns, T., & Bower, R. G. 2013, MNRAS, 429,
1922
Dalgarno, A., & McCray, R. A. 1972, ARA&A, 10, 375
de Blok, W. J. G. 2010, Advances in Astronomy, 2010, 789293
Deason, A. J., Wetzel, A. R., Garrison-Kimmel, S., & Belokurov,
V. 2015, MNRAS, 453, 3568
D’Ercole, A., & Brighenti, F. 1999, MNRAS, 309, 941
Di Cintio, A., Brook, C. B., Dutton, A. A., et al. 2014a,
MNRAS, 441, 2986
Di Cintio, A., Brook, C. B., Macci`o, A. V., et al. 2014b,
MNRAS, 437, 415
Faerman, Y., Sternberg, A., & McKee, C. F. 2013, ApJ, 777, 119
Fillingham, S. P., Cooper, M. C., Wheeler, C., et al. 2015,
MNRAS, 454, 2039
Fryxell, B., Olson, K., Ricker, P., et al. 2000, ApJS, 131, 273
Garrison-Kimmel, S., Boylan-Kolchin, M., Bullock, J. S., & Lee,
K. 2014, MNRAS, 438, 2578
Gatto, A., Fraternali, F., Read, J. I., et al. 2013, MNRAS, 433,
2749
Geha, M., Blanton, M. R., Masjedi, M., & West, A. A. 2006,
ApJ, 653, 240
Geha, M., Blanton, M. R., Yan, R., & Tinker, J. L. 2012, ApJ,
757, 85
Giovanelli, R., Haynes, M. P., Adams, E. A. K., et al. 2013, AJ,
146, 15
Girichidis, P., Walch, S., Naab, T., et al. 2016, MNRAS, 456,
3432
Grcevich, J., & Putman, M. E. 2009, ApJ, 696, 385
Gunn, J. E., & Gott, III, J. R. 1972, ApJ, 176, 1
Hill, A. S., Joung, M. R., Mac Low, M.-M., et al. 2012, ApJ, 750,
Irwin, M. J., Belokurov, V., Evans, N. W., et al. 2007, ApJL,
656, L13
Johnston, K. V. 1998, ApJ, 495, 297
Joung, M. K. R., & Mac Low, M.-M. 2006, ApJ, 653, 1266
Joung, M. R., Mac Low, M.-M., & Bryan, G. L. 2009, ApJ, 704,
Karachentsev, I. D., Makarov, D. I., & Kaisina, E. I. 2013, AJ,
145, 101
Kaufmann, T., Bullock, J. S., Maller, A. H., Fang, T., &
Wadsley, J. 2009, MNRAS, 396, 191
Kenney, J. D. P., Geha, M., J´achym, P., et al. 2014, ApJ, 780,
Kennicutt, Jr., R. C. 1998, ApJ, 498, 541
Korycansky, D. G., Zahnle, K. J., & Low, M.-M. M. 2002,
Icarus, 157, 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Kronberger, T., Kapferer, W., Ferrari, C., Unterguggenberger,
S., & Schindler, S. 2008, A&A, 481, 337
Mac Low, M.-M., & Ferrara, A. 1999, ApJ, 513, 142
Makino, N., Sasaki, S., & Suto, Y. 1998, ApJ, 497, 555
Marcolini, A., Brighenti, F., & D’Ercole, A. 2003, MNRAS, 345,
1329
Mayer, L., Mastropietro, C., Wadsley, J., Stadel, J., & Moore, B.
2006, MNRAS, 369, 1021
McConnachie, A. W. 2012, AJ, 144, 4
McQuinn, K. B. W., Skillman, E. D., Dolphin, A., et al. 2015,
ApJ, 812, 158
Melioli, C., Brighenti, F., & D’Ercole, A. 2015, MNRAS, 446, 299
Miller, M. J., & Bregman, J. N. 2013, ApJ, 770, 118
—. 2015, ApJ, 800, 14
Mori, M., & Burkert, A. 2000, ApJ, 538, 559
Navarro, J. F., Frenk, C. S., & White, S. D. M. 1997, ApJ, 490,
Nichols, M., & Bland-Hawthorn, J. 2011, ApJ, 732, 17
Nichols, M., Revaz, Y., & Jablonka, P. 2015, A&A, 582, A23
Nipoti, C., & Binney, J. 2015, MNRAS, 446, 1820
Ocvirk, P., Gillet, N., Shapiro, P. R., et al. 2015, MNRAS,
submitted, arXiv:1511.00011
Ogiya, G., & Burkert, A. 2015, MNRAS, 446, 2363
Oh, S.-H., de Blok, W. J. G., Brinks, E., Walter, F., &
Kennicutt, Jr., R. C. 2011, AJ, 141, 193
Pearson, S., Besla, G., Putman, M. E., et al. 2016, MNRAS, 459,
1827
Phillips, J. I., Wheeler, C., Boylan-Kolchin, M., et al. 2014,
MNRAS, 437, 1930
Phillips, J. I., Wheeler, C., Cooper, M. C., et al. 2015, MNRAS,
447, 698
Poggianti, B. M., Smail, I., Dressler, A., et al. 1999, ApJ, 518,
Pontzen, A., & Governato, F. 2014, Nature, 506, 171
Pontzen, A., Read, J. I., Teyssier, R., et al. 2015, MNRAS, 451,
1366
Quilis, V., Moore, B., & Bower, R. 2000, Science, 288, 1617
Raﬁeferantsoa, M., Dav´e, R., Angl´es-Alc´azar, D., et al. 2015,
MNRAS, 453, 3980
Read, J. I., Agertz, O., & Collins, M. L. M. 2016, MNRAS,
arXiv:1508.04143
Rhode, K. L., Salzer, J. J., Haurberg, N. C., et al. 2013, AJ, 145,
Rocha, M., Peter, A. H. G., & Bullock, J. 2012, MNRAS, 425,
Roediger, E. 2009, Astronomische Nachrichten, 330, 888
Roediger, E., & Hensler, G. 2005, A&A, 433, 875
Roychowdhury, S., Chengalur, J. N., Begum, A., &
Karachentsev, I. D. 2009, MNRAS, 397, 1435
Ruszkowski, M., Br¨uggen, M., Lee, D., & Shin, M.-S. 2014, ApJ,
784, 75
Ryan-Weber, E. V., Begum, A., Oosterloo, T., et al. 2008,
MNRAS, 384, 535
Salem, M., Besla, G., Bryan, G., et al. 2015, ApJ, 815, 77
Salpeter, E. E. 1955, ApJ, 121, 161
Shen, S., Madau, P., Conroy, C., Governato, F., & Mayer, L.
2014, ApJ, 792, 99
Simpson, C. M., Bryan, G. L., Johnston, K. V., et al. 2013,
MNRAS, 432, 1989
Slater, C. T., & Bell, E. F. 2013, ApJ, 773, 17
—. 2014, ApJ, 792, 141
Slater, C. T., Bell, E. F., Martin, N. F., Tollerud, E. J., & Ho, N.
2015, ApJ, 806, 230
Stierwalt, S., Besla, G., Patton, D., et al. 2015, ApJ, 805, 2
Strigari, L. E., Bullock, J. S., Kaplinghat, M., et al. 2008,
Nature, 454, 1096
Sullivan, M., Le Borgne, D., Pritchet, C. J., et al. 2006, ApJ,
648, 868
Sutherland, R. S., & Dopita, M. A. 1993, ApJS, 88, 253
Tonnesen, S., & Bryan, G. L. 2009, ApJ, 694, 789
Tonnesen, S., Bryan, G. L., & van Gorkom, J. H. 2007, ApJ, 671,
1434
Turk, M. J., Smith, B. D., Oishi, J. S., et al. 2011, ApJS, 192, 9
Vollmer, B., Soida, M., Chung, A., et al. 2010, A&A, 512, A36
Walker, M. G., Mateo, M., Olszewski, E. W., et al. 2009, ApJ,
704, 1274
Weinberg, M. D. 2014, MNRAS, 438, 3007
Weisz, D. R., Dolphin, A. E., Skillman, E. D., et al. 2014a, ApJ,
789, 147
—. 2014b, ApJ, 789, 148
—. 2015, ApJ, 804, 136
Wetzel, A. R., Deason, A. J., & Garrison-Kimmel, S. 2015a,
ApJ, 807, 49
Wetzel, A. R., Tollerud, E. J., & Weisz, D. R. 2015b, ApJL, 808,
Wheeler, C., O˜norbe, J., Bullock, J. S., et al. 2015, MNRAS,
453, 1305
Wheeler, C., Phillips, J. I., Cooper, M. C., Boylan-Kolchin, M.,
& Bullock, J. S. 2014, MNRAS, 442, 1396
Zolotov, A., Brooks, A. M., Willman, B., et al. 2012, ApJ, 761,