Coverage Analysis for Millimeter Wave Networks:
The Impact of Directional Antenna Arrays
Xianghao Yu, Student Member, IEEE, Jun Zhang, Senior Member, IEEE, Martin Haenggi, Fellow, IEEE,
and Khaled B. Letaief, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—Millimeter wave (mm-wave) communications is con-
sidered a promising technology for 5G networks. Exploiting
beamforming gains with large-scale antenna arrays to combat
the increased path loss at mm-wave bands is one of its deﬁning
features. However, previous works on mm-wave network analysis
usually adopted oversimpliﬁed antenna patterns for tractability,
which can lead to signiﬁcant deviation from the performance with
actual antenna patterns. In this paper, using tools from stochastic
geometry, we carry out a comprehensive investigation on the
impact of directional antenna arrays in mm-wave networks. We
ﬁrst present a general and tractable framework for coverage
analysis with arbitrary distributions for interference power and
arbitrary antenna patterns. It is then applied to mm-wave ad
hoc and cellular networks, where two sophisticated antenna
patterns with desirable accuracy and analytical tractability are
proposed to approximate the actual antenna pattern. Compared
with previous works, the proposed approximate antenna patterns
help to obtain more insights on the role of directional antenna
arrays in mm-wave networks. In particular, it is shown that the
coverage probabilities of both types of networks increase as a
non-decreasing concave function with the antenna array size.
The analytical results are veriﬁed to be effective and reliable
through simulations, and numerical results also show that large-
scale antenna arrays are required for satisfactory coverage in
mm-wave networks.
Index Terms—Antenna pattern, coverage probability, direc-
tional antenna array, millimeter wave, stochastic geometry.
I. INTRODUCTION
O meet the ever-increasing demands for high-data-rate
multimedia access, the capacity of next-generation wire-
less networks has to increase exponentially. One promising
way to boost the capacity is to exploit new spectrum bands.
Recently, millimeter wave (mm-wave) bands from 28 GHz to
300 GHz have been proposed as a promising candidate for
new spectrum in 5G networks, which previously were only
Manuscript received October 28, 2016; revised February 21, 2017; accepted
March 5, 2017. Date of publication XXXXX XX, 2017; date of current version
XXXXX XX, 2017. This work was supported by the Hong Kong Research
Grants Council under Grant No. 16210216 and the U.S. NSF (grant CCF
1525904). This work was presented in part at IEEE Wireless Communications
and Networking Conference, Doha, Qatar, Apr. 2016 [1].
X. Yu and J. Zhang with the Department of Electronic and Computer
Engineering, the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (HKUST),
Kowloon, Hong Kong (e-mail: {xyuam, eejzhang}@ust.hk).
M. Haenggi is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, University
of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556 USA (e-mail: mhaenggi@nd.edu).
K. B. Letaief is with the Department of Electronic and Computer Engi-
neering, the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (HKUST),
Kowloon, Hong Kong, and also with Hamad bin Khalifa University, Doha,
Qatar (e-mail: eekhaled@ust.hk; kletaief@hbku.edu.qa).
Color versions of one or more of the ﬁgures in this paper are available
online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/JSAC.2017.XXXXXXX
considered for indoor and ﬁxed outdoor scenarios [2]. This
proposal is supported by recent experiments in the United
States and Korea [3], [4], showing that mm-wave signals can
cover up to 200 meters.
Lately, channel measurements have conﬁrmed some unique
propagation characteristics of mm-wave signals [5]. It turns
out that mm-wave signals are sensitive to blockages, which
causes totally different path loss laws for line-of-sight (LOS)
and non-line-of-sight (NLOS) mm-wave signals. Furthermore,
diffraction and scattering effects are shown to be limited for
mm-wave signals. This makes the conventional channel model
for sub-6 GHz systems no longer suitable, and thus more
sophisticated channel models are needed for the performance
analysis of mm-wave networks.
Another distinguishing characteristic of mm-wave signals is
the directional transmission. Thanks to the small wavelength
of mm-wave signals, large-scale directional antenna arrays can
be leveraged to provide substantial array gains and synthesize
highly directional beams, which help to compensate for the
additional free space path loss caused by the ten-fold increase
of the carrier frequency [3]. More importantly, different from
the rich diffraction and scattering environment in sub-6 GHz
systems, directional antennas will dramatically change the
signal power, as well as the interference power. In mm-
wave networks, the signal or interference power is highly
directional and closely related to the angles of departure/arrival
(AoDs/AoAs). In particular, the directional antenna array
will provide variable power gains corresponding to different
AoDs/AoAs. Even a slight shift of AoD/AoA may lead to a
large array gain variation. Therefore, it is necessary and critical
to incorporate the directional antenna arrays when analyzing
mm-wave networks.
A. Related Works and Motivation
There exist several studies of the coverage performance of
mm-wave networks [6]–[17]. Analytical results for coverage
and rate coverage probabilities in noise-limited mm-wave net-
works were presented in [6]. Although directional transmission
does, to some extent, suppress co-channel interference, a dense
deployment is usually required to overcome the blockage in
mm-wave networks, which makes mm-wave networks prone
to be interference-limited. Hence, only including noise into
the coverage analysis is not enough. Analytical results on
signal-to-interference-plus-noise ratio (SINR) and rate cover-
age based on a simpliﬁed directional antenna pattern were
obtained for device-to-device (D2D) [7], ad hoc [8], and
arXiv:1702.04493v2  [cs.IT]  20 Apr 2017

--- PAGE BREAK ---

cellular [9], [10] networks, respectively. To maintain analytical
tractability, the antenna pattern was simpliﬁed as a ﬂat-top
pattern, which is a widely used simpliﬁcation. Since the di-
rectional antenna array is a differentiating feature in mm-wave
systems, it is crucial and intriguing to accurately incorporate
it into the mm-wave network performance analysis.
Basically, the ﬂat-top antenna pattern quantizes the con-
tinuously varying antenna array gains in a binary manner.
Although it signiﬁcantly simpliﬁes the analytical derivation,
the oversimpliﬁed ﬂat-top pattern will lead to pessimistic
coverage results, as will be revealed in this paper. Moreover, it
is difﬁcult to analyze the impact of directional antenna arrays
with the ﬂat-top antenna pattern, as only a few parameters
are extracted to abstractly depict the actual antenna pattern.
In practice, some critical parameters of the antenna beam
pattern such as beamwidth, the n-th minor lobe maxima,
nulls, and front-back ratio are all determined by the array
size. Nevertheless, with the ﬂat-top antenna pattern, these
parameters can only be determined qualitatively and inac-
curately according to the array size. As a side effect, the
quantized antenna array gain also hinders further investigations
of directional antenna arrays. For example, it is difﬁcult to
analyze beam misalignment, which is a critical problem in
mm-wave networks [2].
Recently, there have been some works considering the actual
antenna pattern. Two works considered random beamforming
in mm-wave networks and used the actual antenna pattern, but
only focused on the single link analysis without interference
[11], [12], and adopted some asymptotic approximation in the
analysis. The actual antenna pattern was adopted in [13] for
evaluating the capacity of an interfered communication link.
However, all the interferers were assumed to use the same
array gain, which weakens the practicality of the analytical
result. An SINR coverage analysis incorporating the actual
antenna pattern was carried out in [14]. While the coverage
probability is analytically given, the multiple integrals (4
nested integrals in the expression) prevent practical evaluation.
Also, a Rayleigh fading channel model is not realistic for mm-
wave networks due to their poor scattering property. All these
works demonstrated that the actual antenna pattern suffers
from poor analytical tractability. In addition, there are some
works proposing different approximate antenna patterns. In
[15], a Gaussian antenna pattern was numerically shown to
be a good candidate to approximate the actual antenna pattern
but does not lend itself to further analysis. Moreover, though
the aforementioned works presented some analytical results
with the actual antenna pattern, none of them unraveled how
the array size will inﬂuence mm-wave networks, which is a
critical and unique problem in mm-wave systems, and has
only been reported through some simulation works [16], [17].
To this end, an antenna pattern that not only approximates the
actual antenna pattern accurately and realistically, but also with
acceptable analytical tractability, is required to reveal more
insights on directional antenna arrays in mm-wave networks.
In summary, there is so far no comprehensive investigation
on the impact of directional antenna arrays in mm-wave
networks. In this work, we will ﬁll this gap with new analytical
results of coverage probabilities that adopt more accurate
approximations for the actual antenna pattern.
B. Contributions
We investigate the coverage1 probabilities in mm-wave
networks with a random spatial network model, where trans-
mitters are modeled as a homogeneous Poisson point process
(PPP) [18], and the blockage effect is reﬂected by a LOS ball
blockage model [9]. All the transmitters are assumed to utilize
analog beamforming to serve the corresponding users. The
main contributions of this work are summarized as follows.
• We ﬁrst present a general framework for the coverage
analysis in mm-wave networks, with arbitrary interfer-
ence power distributions and antenna patterns, under the
assumption that the information signal power is gamma
distributed. Compared to previous results, the new expres-
sion of the coverage probability is more compact and can
be evaluated more efﬁciently.
• Based on the general framework, analytical expressions
of the coverage probabilities for both mm-wave ad hoc
and cellular networks are provided. For these two types of
networks, two approximate antenna patterns are proposed
to achieve a good balance between accuracy and analyti-
cal tractability. While the proposed approximate antenna
patterns are more complicated than the ﬂat-top pattern,
our analytical results are more tractable for practical
evaluation, thanks to a new approach to deal with gamma
distributed signal powers and interferers located in a ﬁnite
region.
• With the highly tractable coverage probabilities at hand,
the impact of directional antenna arrays in both mm-wave
ad hoc and cellular networks is investigated. We show that
the coverage probabilities are monotone increasing func-
tions of the array size. Moreover, the increasing functions
are similar in both kinds of networks, which is the product
of an exponential and a polynomial function of the inverse
of array size. Asymptotic outage probabilities are also
derived when the number of antennas goes to inﬁnity,
which shows that the asymptotic outage probability is
inversely proportional to the array size. This is the ﬁrst
analytical result on the impact of antenna arrays that has
been derived in mm-wave networks.
• All the analytical results are shown to be computationally
efﬁcient through numerical evaluations. Numerical results
also show that NLOS signals and NLOS interference
have negligible impact on the coverage probability in
mm-wave networks. Moreover, the interference power in
mm-wave networks is shown to be dominated by the
directional antenna array gains, and large-scale direc-
tional antenna arrays are needed in mm-wave networks
to maintain an acceptable coverage probability. With the
increasing network density, the coverage probability has
a peak value in mm-wave cellular networks, while it
monotonically decreases in ad hoc networks.
1The terminology “coverage” is used for both cellular and ad hoc networks.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C. Organization
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. We
shall present the system model in Section II, and a general
coverage analysis framework for mm-wave networks is intro-
duced in Section III. Then the coverage probabilities, as well
as the impact of directional antenna arrays, for mm-wave ad
hoc and cellular networks are derived in Sections IV and V,
respectively. Numerical results will be presented in Section
VI, and conclusions will be drawn in Section VII.
II. SYSTEM MODEL
A. Network and Channel Models
We consider downlink transmission in both mm-wave ad
hoc and cellular networks. We will ﬁrst present the common
features for both types of networks, and the difference will be
speciﬁed later. The transmitters are assumed to be distributed
according to a homogeneous PPP [18], which has been shown
to be a network model with both reasonable accuracy and
analytical tractability [19]. As depicted in Fig. 1, we consider
the receiver at the origin, which, under an expectation over the
point process, becomes the typical receiver. We assume that
each receiver has a single receive antenna and is receiving
signals from the corresponding transmitter equipped with
a directional antenna array composed of Nt elements. All
transmitters operate at a constant power Pt.
We use the LOS ball [9], [20] to model the blockage effect
as shown in Fig. 1(a). Speciﬁcally, we deﬁne a LOS radius
R, which represents the distance between a receiver and its
nearby blockages, and the LOS probability of a certain link
is one within R and zero outside the radius. Compared with
other blockage models adopted in the performance analysis
for mm-wave networks, e.g., the 3GPP-like urban micro-
cellular model, the LOS ball model has a better ﬁt with
real-world blockage scenarios [21]. The incorporation of the
blockages induces different path loss laws for LOS and NLOS
links. It has been pointed out in [8], [9] that NLOS signals
and NLOS interference are negligible in mm-wave networks.
Hence, we will focus on the analysis where the typical receiver
is associated with a LOS transmitter and the interference stems
from LOS interferers. The relevant transmitters thus form a
PPP, denoted as Φ, with density λb in a disk of radius R
centered at the origin. In Section VI, we will justify the LOS
assumption through simulations.
Directional antenna arrays are leveraged to provide signif-
icant beamforming gains to overcome the path loss and to
synthesize highly directional beams. Universal frequency reuse
is assumed, and thus the received signal for the typical receiver
is given by
hx0wx0
Ptsx0
x∈Φ′
β∥x∥−α
2 hxwx
Ptsx + n0,
where r0 = ∥x0∥is the distance between the typical receiver
and its corresponding transmitter, while ∥x∥is the distance
between the transmitter at location x and the typical receiver.
The locations of the interfering transmitters are denoted as Φ′,
and the channel vector between the interferer and the typical
Blockages
NLOS interferers
LOS interferers
Corresponding transmitter 
of the typical receiver
Typical receiver
Fig. 1. (a): A sample mm-wave network where transmitters are modeled as a
PPP. The LOS ball is used to model the blockage effect in the network. (b):
Illustration of the spatial AoDs ϑx and ϕx.
receiver is denoted as hx. The path loss exponent and intercept
are symbolized by α and β [5]. In addition, the beamforming
vector of the transmitter at location x is denoted as wx, and
n0 stands for the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) with
power being σ2.
One main difference between the models for mm-wave ad
hoc and cellular networks is the distance r0 between the typical
receiver and its corresponding transmitter. In ad hoc networks,
each transmitter is assumed to have a corresponding receiver
at a ﬁxed distance r0 that is called the dipole distance. On
the other hand, in cellular networks, the distance r0 between
the typical user and its serving base station (BS) is random,
due to the random locations of BS and users. We assume that
the typical user is associated with its nearest BS, which is
commonly adopted in cellular network analysis. The difference
in r0 also gives rise to another difference between these two
kinds of networks, i.e., the set of interferers Φ′. In ad hoc
networks, a dipolar pair is added with the receiver at the origin,
and this pair becomes the typical pair. Therefore, Φ′ = Φ.
On the other hand, because each user in cellular networks is
associated with the nearest BS, which is part of the PPP Φ, the
set of interfering BSs Φ′ = Φ\{x0} forms a PPP conditional
on x0 within a ring with inner diameter r0 and outer diameter
Next we will present the channel model. Due to high free-
space path loss, the mm-wave propagation environment is well
characterized by a clustered channel model, i.e., the Saleh-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Valenzuela model [5],
hx =
ρxlaH
t (ϑxl),
where (·)H symbolizes the conjugate transpose and L is the
number of clusters. The complex small-scale fading gain of
the l-th cluster is denoted as ρxl. Due to the poor scattering
environment, especially for LOS signals and interference, the
Rayleigh fading assumption commonly used in sub-6 GHz
systems no longer holds, which has also been noted in recent
works [21]. In this paper, we assume, as in [9], that |ρxl|
follows independent Nakagami-M fading for each link.
For mm-wave channels containing LOS components, the
effect of NLOS signals is negligible since the channel gains
of NLOS paths are typically 20 dB weaker than those of
LOS signals [5]. Hence, for the remainder of this paper,
we will focus on LOS paths, i.e., L = 1, and adopt a
uniformly random single path (UR-SP) channel model that
is commonly used in mm-wave network analysis [11], [12],
[22], [23]. In addition, at(ϑx) represents the transmit array
response vector corresponding to the spatial AoD ϑx, and it
has been shown in [1, Fig. 3] that uniform distribution is an
excellent approximation for the distribution of spatial AoDs.
We consider the uniform linear array (ULA) with Nt antenna
elements. Therefore, the array response vectors are written as
at(ϑx) =
1, · · · , ej2πkϑx, · · · , ej2π(Nt−1)ϑxiT
where ϑx = d
λ cos φx is assumed uniformly distributed over
λ, d
, and 0 ≤k < Nt is the antenna index. Furthermore,
d, λ, and φx are the antenna spacing, wavelength, and physical
AoD. In order to enhance the directionality of the beam, the
antenna spacing d should be no larger than half-wavelength to
avoid grating lobes [24].
B. Analog Beamforming and Antenna Pattern
While various space-time processing techniques can be
applied at each multi-antenna mm-wave transmitter, we fo-
cus on analog beamforming, where the beam direction is
controlled via phase shifters. Due to the low cost and low
power consumption, analog beamforming has already been
adopted in commercial mm-wave systems such as WiGig
(IEEE 802.11ad) [3]. Assuming the spatial AoD of the channel
between the transmitter at location x and its serving user is
ϕx, the optimal analog beamforming vector is well known and
given by
wx = at(ϕx),
which means the transmitter should align the beam direction
exactly with the AoD of the channel to obtain the maximum
power gain.
As shown in Fig. 1(b), based on the optimal analog beam-
forming vector (4), for the typical receiver, the product of
small-scale fading gain and beamforming gain of the trans-
mitter at location x is given by
|hxwx|2 = Nt |ρx|2 aH
t (ϑx)at(ϕx)
where |ρx|2 is the power gain of small-scale fading. By
deﬁning the array gain function Gact(x) as
Gact(x) ≜sin2 (πNtx)
t sin2 (πx),
the normalized array gain of the transmitter at location x can
be expressed as
t (ϑx)at(ϕx)
Nt−1
ej2πi(ϑx−ϕx)
= sin2 [πNt(ϑx −ϕx)]
t sin2 [π(ϑx −ϕx)] = Gact(ϑx −ϕx),
where ϑx and ϕx are independent uniformly distributed ran-
dom variables over
λ, d
. The array gain function in (7) is
a normalized Fej´er kernel with factor
Nt and is referred as the
actual antenna pattern. In fact, the distribution of ϑx −ϕx in
(7) is uniform, which is stated in the following lemma. Note
that this substitution will not change the overall distribution
of the array gain.
Lemma 1. The array gain Gact(ϑx −ϕx) is equal in dis-
tribution to Gact
, where θx is a uniformly distributed
random variable over [−1, 1].
Proof: The proof is based on the uniform distribution of
ϑx and ϕx, and the periodic property of the function ej2πx in
(7). The proof has been established in [11, Appendix A].
Although the Fej´er kernel has a relatively simple analytical
form, it does not lend itself to further analysis due to the
sine functions in both the numerator and denominator, which
calls for an approximate antenna pattern with both accuracy
and tractability in performance analysis of mm-wave networks.
Next we will introduce two new approximate antenna patterns,
as well as the ﬂat-top antenna pattern, which has been widely
used in existing works. Fig. 2 visualizes these antenna patterns
and evaluates the coverage probabilities with different antenna
patterns through simulation.
1) Flat-top antenna pattern: Most of the existing works [7]–
[10] adopt this simpliﬁed antenna pattern in the coverage anal-
ysis, where the array gains within the half-power beamwidth
(HPBW) [24] are assumed to be the maximum power gain,
and the array gains corresponding to the remaining AoDs are
approximated to be the ﬁrst minor maximum gain of the actual
antenna pattern. While this simple approximation is highly
tractable, it introduces huge discrepancies when we evaluate
the network coverage probability, as shown in Fig. 2(b)2.
2) Sinc antenna pattern: Instead of the actual antenna pat-
tern, a tight lower bound is widely adopted for the numerical
analysis in antenna theory. Since the antenna spacing d is
usually no larger than half-wavelength to avoid grating lobes,
and sin x ≃x for small x, the array gain function can be
approximately expressed as [24, Equation (6-10d)]
Gsinc(x) ≜sin2 (πNtx)
(πNtx)2
2The gap can be narrowed by heuristically choosing different parameters
for the ﬂat-top pattern, e.g., beamwidth and front-back ratio, but the overall
shape of the coverage probability remains different.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
0.03
0.035
0.04
0.045
0.05
Angle x in Rad.
Normalized Array Gain
Actual antenna pattern (6)
Flat-top antenna pattern
Sinc antenna pattern (8)
Cosine antenna pattern (9)
(a) Visualization of four different antenna patterns when Nt =
SINR Threshold (dB)
Coverage Probability
Actual antenna pattern (7)
Flat-top antenna pattern
Sinc antenna pattern (8)
Cosine antenna pattern (9)
(b) Coverage probability evaluations using four different an-
tenna patterns in mm-wave cellular networks when R = 200
m, Nt = 64, λb = 1 × 10−3 m−2, M = 3, and α = 2.1.
Fig. 2. The comparisons between different approximate antenna patterns.
which is a squared sinc function. The accuracy of this tight
lower bound is shown in [24, Appendix I,II]. In Fig. 2(a), it
turns out that the sinc antenna pattern is almost the same as the
actual antenna pattern, and there is almost no error when using
this approximate antenna pattern to investigate the coverage
probability, as illustrated in Fig. 2(b). Moreover, note that the
sinc function is more tractable due to the absence of the sine
function in the denominator, compared to the actual antenna
pattern.
3) Cosine antenna pattern: Another antenna pattern approx-
imation is based on the cosine function as follows
Gcos(x) =
cos2   πNt
|x| ≤
Nt ,
otherwise,
where the nonzero part is an elementary function with better
analytical tractability. In Fig. 2(a), we observe that the cosine
antenna pattern provides a good approximation for the main
lobe gains while sacriﬁcing the accuracy for the side lobe ones.
When incorporated into the coverage probability, the cosine
antenna pattern has negligible gap between the actual antenna
pattern, which can be viewed as a desirable trade-off between
accuracy and tractability in performance analysis for mm-wave
networks.
Fig. 2 shows that the sinc and cosine antenna patterns are
more accurate. In particular, they are superior to the ﬂat-top
pattern since they accurately capture the impact of directional
antenna arrays in mm-wave networks. In particular, given
the operating frequency and the antenna spacing, the antenna
pattern is critically determined by the array size. In the ﬂat-
top pattern, however, it is very difﬁcult to quantitatively and
accurately depict the variation of the HPBW and the ﬁrst minor
maximum for different array sizes and AoDs. Moreover, the
binary quantization of the array gains cannot reﬂect the roll-
off characteristic of the actual antenna pattern and therefore
is unable to provide different array gains for various AoDs.
In other words, the ﬂat-top antenna pattern obliterates the
possibility of analyzing the impact of directional antenna
arrays, which is a critical and unique issue in mm-wave
systems. On the contrary, the sinc and cosine antenna patterns
are explicit functions of the array size, which makes it possible
to investigate the relation between the coverage probability and
the directional antenna arrays. The sinc and cosine antenna
patterns will be adopted in the coverage analysis for mm-
wave ad hoc and cellular networks in Sections IV and V,
respectively.
III. A GENERAL FRAMEWORK FOR COVERAGE ANALYSIS
OF MM-WAVE NETWORKS
In this section, we will develop a general framework for the
coverage analysis of mm-wave networks. The main result is a
tractable expression for the coverage probability, for arbitrary
antenna patterns and interference distributions. It will then be
applied in the following two sections to evaluate mm-wave ad
hoc networks and mm-wave cellular networks.
A. Signal-to-interference-plus-noise Ratio (SINR) Analysis
We assume that each transmitter has full information about
the AoD of the channel between itself and its serving user,
which can be obtained through sophisticated beam training
protocols [3]. The transmitters can align the beam to the
AoD direction, according to (4), using analog beamforming
to obtain the maximum antenna array gain. The SINR at the
typical receiver is then given by
SINR =
PtNt|ρx0|2βr−α
σ2 + P
x∈Φ′ Ptgxβ∥x∥−α =
|ρx0|2r−α
σ2n + P
x∈Φ′ gx∥x∥−α ,
(10)
where σ2
βPtNt is the normalized noise power and gx is
the channel gain from the interfering transmitter at location x,
including both the small-scale fading gain and the directional
antenna array gain3. In this section, we assume (gx)x∈Φ′ is
a family of non-negative random variables with independent
3Since gx is an arbitrary channel gain, when normalizing the noise power
by Nt, we abbreviate the normalized channel gain
Nt as gx with a slight
abuse of notation.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

and identically distributions, which will be speciﬁed in the
following two sections.
Besides the complicated directional antenna array gains,
there is another difﬁculty when calculating the SINR dis-
tribution. Note that the channel gain for the signal |ρx0|2
follows a gamma distribution Gamma
 M, 1
, where M is
the Nakagami parameter. Compared with the exponential dis-
tributed power gain induced by Rayleigh fading, this gamma
distribution brings additional challenges into the derivation.
Note that the gamma distribution for the signal power widely
appears when evaluating various multi-antenna systems. Many
previous works illustrated that the signal power is gamma
distributed considering more general transmission techniques,
e.g., maximal ratio transmission [25], or other network settings
such as heterogeneous networks [26].
B. Coverage Analysis Framework
The coverage probability, deﬁned as the probability that the
received SINR is greater than a certain threshold τ, is written
pc(τ) = P
|ρx0|2r−α
σ2n + P
x∈Φ′ gx∥x∥−α > τ
|ρx0|2 > τrα
n + I
(11)
where I = P
x∈Φ′ gx∥x∥−α. As mentioned before, one main
difﬁculty of the analysis comes from the gamma distributed
random variable |ρx0|2. In previous works that investigated
the coverage analysis for mm-wave networks [1], [7]–[9], an
upper bound for the cumulative probability function (cdf) of a
normalized gamma random variable was adopted. In contrast,
in this paper, we will derive an exact expression for this
probability. The coverage probability (11) is ﬁrstly rewritten
pc(τ)
= Er0
(M−1
(Mτrα
0 )n
n + I)ne−Mτrα
0 (σ2
n+I)i)
= Er0
"M−1
(−s)n
L(n)(s)
(12)
where s = Mτrα
0 , L(s) = e−sσ2
e−sI
is the Laplace
transform of noise and interference. The variable r0 is random
in cellular networks but deterministic in ad hoc ones. The
notation L(n)(s) = (−1)nEI
n + I)ne−s(σ2
n+I)i
stands for
the n-th derivative of L(s), and step (a) is from the cdf of a
gamma random variable.
Next, we will derive the coverage probability based on
the expression (12). In particular, we will show that, for
arbitrary distributions of the channel gain, the n-th derivative
of the Laplace transform can be expressed in a recursive
form. Afterwards, the coverage probability can be expressed
by the induced ℓ1-norm of a lower triangular Toeplitz matrix.
This approach yields a more compact analytical result for the
coverage probability than previous works, thanks to the more
delicate handling of the gamma distributed fading gain. More
importantly, this framework enables us to perform further
analyses of mm-wave networks, e.g., to investigate the impact
of directional antenna arrays in later sections, which cannot
be unraveled from existing works.
The ﬁrst step is to derive the Laplace transform L(s), given
in the following lemma. As mentioned in Section II-A, we
focus on the LOS interference within the LOS radius R in the
following derivation.
Lemma 2. Assuming a lower bound κ on the distance between
the typical receiver and the nearest interferer, the Laplace
transform of noise and interference is
L(s) = exp
−sσ2
n −πλb
R2 −κ2 + δκ2Eg
E1+δ(sκ−αg)
−δR2Eg
E1+δ(sR−αg)
 o
≜exp {η(s)} ,
(13)
where δ =
α, Ep(z) is the generalized exponential integral
[27, Page xxxv], and g is the channel gain that is distributed
as all the gx in (10).
Proof: The Laplace transform of the interference I,
denoted as LI(s), is well known and is written as [28]
LI(s) = EI
e−sI
= exp
−2πλb
 1 −Eg[exp(−sgx−α)]
(14)
Note that the expectation over g is another integral, so (14)
involves a double integral. Since the integration function is
integrable, according to Fubini’s theorem, we can swap the
order of the expectation and integration, and part of the
exponent of LI(s) can be recast as
 1 −Eg[exp(−sgx−α)]
= 2Eg
"Z R
1 −exp(−sgx−α)
(15)
= R2 −κ2 + Eg
(sg)δ
Z sgκ−α
sgR−α e−tdt−δ
= R2 −κ2 + δκ2Eg
E1+δ(sκ−αg)
−δR2Eg
E1+δ(sR−αg)
(16)
By substituting (16) into (14), the Laplace transform L(s) in
Lemma 2 can be obtained.
Calculating the Laplace transform in PPP usually involves
two expectation operations over the interferers’ locations and
channel gains, respectively. Note that in the derivation of
Lemma 2, we ﬁrst take the expectation over the interfer-
ers’ locations and then average over the channel gains as
shown in (15), which is in the reverse order compared to
the conventional derivation [28] and existing works in mm-
wave networks [1], [7]–[9]. The reason why we perform these
two expectations in this order is that, in mm-wave networks,
the distribution of the channel gains involving the directional
antenna array gains are much more complicated than that in
sub-6 GHz networks, and therefore we take it as the latter step

--- PAGE BREAK ---

to maintain the analytical tractability. In later sections we will
see the beneﬁts of this swapping.
Based on the Laplace transform derived in Lemma 2, the
coverage probability is given in the following theorem.
Theorem 1. The coverage probability (11) is given by
pc(τ) =
∥exp (CM)∥1
ad hoc,
fr0(r) ∥exp {CM(r)}∥1 dr
cellular,
(17)
where fr0(r) is the probability density function (pdf) of
the distance between the typical receiver and its associated
transmitter, and CM is an M × M lower triangular Toeplitz
matrix
CM =

c1 c0
cM−1 · · · c2 c1 c0

(18)
whose nonzero entries are determined by
ck = (−s)k
η(k)(s),
(19)
and ck > 0 for k ≥1.
Proof: See Appendix A.
As stated in Section III-A, the main assumption in Theorem
1 is the gamma distributed signal power, and this theorem
holds for arbitrary interference distributions and antenna pat-
terns. Furthermore, note that we adopt a general exponent
η(s) of the Laplace transform L(s), and thus Theorem 1
can be viewed as a generalization of the results in [25],
[26]. When the exponent η(s) is speciﬁed as [25, Equation
(35)] and [26, Equation (36)] according to different network
settings and fading assumptions, Theorem 1 specializes to the
expressions therein. In mm-wave networks, the channel gain
g not only includes the small-scale fading gain, but also the
directional antenna array gain. With Theorem 1 at hand, in
order to obtain the speciﬁc coverage probability expression
for a certain kind of channel gain g, the only parameters
required to be determined are the entries {ck}M−1
in the
matrix CM. While we focus on analog beamforming, the
framework proposed in this section is also applicable for mm-
wave networks adopting other transmission techniques, e.g.,
hybrid precoding [29], [30]. In the following two sections, we
shall derive the coverage probabilities for different network
settings and antenna patterns.
IV. COVERAGE ANALYSIS FOR MM-WAVE AD HOC
NETWORKS
Millimeter wave communications has been proposed as a
promising technique for next-generation ad hoc networks with
short-range transmission, e.g., military battleﬁeld networks
[31], high-ﬁdelity video transmission [3], and D2D networks
[32]. In this section, we will ﬁrst derive an analytical expres-
sion of the coverage probability for mm-wave ad hoc networks,
based on which we will then investigate the critical role of
directional antenna arrays in such networks.
A. Coverage Analysis
In mm-wave ad hoc networks, a dipole model is adopted,
where the communication distance between the typical re-
ceiver and its associated transmitter is assumed to be ﬁxed
as the dipole distance [18]. As mentioned in Section II-A, we
assume that the typical dipole pair is in the LOS condition,
i.e., r0 ≤R. In fact, if the typical receiver is associated
with a NLOS transmitter out of the LOS radius, due to the
huge path loss and high noise power at mm-wave bands, the
coverage probability will be fairly low (close to zero) for a
practical SINR threshold, and therefore with little analytical
signiﬁcance. Furthermore, in ad hoc networks, the nearest
interferer can be arbitrarily close to the typical receiver, i.e.,
κ = 0. According to (10), the received SINR is given by
SINR =
|ρx0|2r−α
σ2n + P
x∈Φ |ρx|2Gact
∥x∥−α .
(20)
As mentioned in Section II-B, the sinc antenna pattern is an
excellent approximation of the actual antenna pattern with
better analytical tractability, so we propose to adopt it in the
analysis of mm-wave ad hoc networks.
Note that in Section III-B, we have pointed out that the main
task to derive the coverage probability pc(τ) is to determine
the entries in the matrix CM. The channel gain g is the product
of the gamma distributed small-scale fading gain |ρx|2 and
the directional antenna array gain Gsinc
. First, a unique
property of the directional array gain with the sinc antenna
pattern is presented to help derive the coverage probability.
Lemma 3. For p ∈Z+,
sin x
dx =
2(2p −1)!
2p −1
p −1
(21)
where
Eulerian
numbers,
i.e.,
Pk+1
j=0(−1)j n+1
(k −j + 1)n.
Proof: The proof can be found in [1, Lemma 2].
Based on Lemma 3, a lower bound of the coverage proba-
bility with the sinc antenna pattern is derived in the following
proposition.
Proposition 1. The coverage probability of mm-wave ad
hoc networks with the sinc antenna pattern is tightly lower
bounded by
psinc
(τ) ≥
(22)
The coefﬁcients in CM are given by
ck =
πR2λbλ
p=max{1,k}
(−τrα
0 )p
2p−1
Γ(M + p)
Rαp(2p −1)!(p −k)! (p −δ) Γ(M)
−δλbλ
(δ)k Γ (−δ) Γ (M + δ)
Γ(M)
τ δr2
+1(k ≤1)τMrα
0 σ2
× (−1)k+1
(23)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

where Γ(·) denotes the gamma function, (x)n represents the
falling factorial, 1(·) is the indicator function, and
sin x
(24)
Proof: See Appendix B.
Remark 1: According to recent mm-wave channel measure-
ments [5], the path loss exponent α is less than 3, which
ensures the convergence of ξ.
Remark 2: Although the expressions in Proposition 1 in-
volve a summation of inﬁnitely many terms, it turns out that,
in practical evaluation, the series converges quickly, and the
high-order terms contribute little to the sum. Hence, using a
ﬁnite number of terms is sufﬁcient for numerical computation.
In addition, ξ only depends on the path loss exponent α and
can easily be evaluated numerically and ofﬂine. Overall, the
expression in Proposition 1 is much easier to evaluate than
existing results [7], [8] that contain multiple nested integrals.
Remark 3: Note that the derivation in Appendix B is based
on the Laplace transform provided in Lemma 2, where we
swap the order of two expectations as mentioned in Section
III-B. With the help of this swapping operation, we are able to
derive a more tractable expression for the Laplace transform,
which veriﬁes the beneﬁts and superiority of the proposed
analytical framework.
Remark 4: For a given coverage probability, the maximum
transmitter density can be numerically determined by Propo-
sition 1.
B. Impact of Directional Antenna Arrays
Next we investigate how directional antenna arrays affect
the coverage probability in mm-wave networks. Increasing
the array size enhances the signal quality, but may also
increase interference power. The overall effect is revealed in
the following corollary.
Corollary 1. The tight lower bound of the coverage probabil-
ity (22) is a non-decreasing concave function with the array
size, and it can be rewritten as
psinc
(t) ≥ec0t
βntn
(25)
where t =
Nt , and
βn = ∥(CM −c0IM)n∥1
n ≥1.
(26)
When t →0, i.e., Nt →∞, the asymptotic outage probability
is given by
˜psinc
(t) ∼µ
(27)
where µ = −PM−1
n=0 cn > 0.
Proof: See Appendix C.
It can be seen in Corollary 1 that psinc
(t) →1 as t →0
for all network parameters. Hence, for any desired coverage
requirement 1 −ϵ, there exists a minimum antenna array
size Nt that can satisfy it regardless of the other network
parameters, which can be numerically determined by Corollary
1. The lower bound in Corollary 1 indicates how antenna
arrays affect the coverage probability. From Corollary 1, we
discover that increasing the directional antenna array size will
deﬁnitely beneﬁt the coverage probability in ad hoc networks.
Later in Section VI we show that the result is tight through
simulations. Moreover, we see that the lower bound is a
product of an exponential function and a polynomial function
of order M −1 of the inverse of the array size t. For the
special case that M = 1, i.e., Rayleigh fading channel, the
lower bound reduces to an exponential one. The asymptotic
coverage probability (27) shows that the asymptotic outage
probability is inversely proportional to the array size. To the
best of the authors’ knowledge, this is the ﬁrst analytical result
on the impact of antenna arrays in mm-wave network analysis.
Remark 5: Note that the manipulation in Corollary 1 is
based on the proposed analytical framework in Section III.
Especially, it beneﬁts greatly from the delicate tackling of the
gamma distributed signal power, via a lower triangular Toeplitz
matrix representation. If the upper bound in [1], [7]–[9] was
used instead, we would not be able explicitly reveal the impact
of antenna arrays, which, from another perspective, conﬁrms
the advantages of the proposed analytical framework.
V. COVERAGE ANALYSIS FOR MM-WAVE CELLULAR
NETWORKS
In this section, we will analyze the coverage probability for
mm-wave cellular networks. While the sinc antenna pattern
can still be employed to get a highly accurate approximation
of the actual antenna pattern, its numerical evaluation is
more complicated and the expression reveals little insight. In
particular, as (17) showed, an additional integral is needed
over the distance between the serving BS and the typical user.
Furthermore, since κ = r0 in cellular networks, the summation
of inﬁnite terms in the integrand does not converge quickly.
Instead, we will analyze the cosine antenna pattern in this
section, which will provide a more tractable expression. The
impact of antenna arrays on the coverage probability will then
be investigated.
A. Coverage Analysis
In contrast to existing works [9], we will present an
analytical result for coverage probability that fully reﬂects
the directionality in mm-wave cellular networks. Note that
although the proposed approximate antenna pattern is more
complicated than the ﬂat-top pattern, the new expression based
on the analytical framework in Section III is more compact
and tractable. With the cosine antenna pattern, the coverage
probability is derived in the following proposition.
Proposition 2. The coverage probability of mm-wave cellular
networks with the cosine antenna pattern is given by
pcos
c (τ) = πλb
Z R2
e−πλbr
CM(r)
dr. (28)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The nonzero entries in CM are determined by
ck(r) = 2√πλbλΓ
 k + 1
Γ(M + k)τ k
d(k!)2(αk −2)Γ(M)
Jk (−τ) r −Jk
Rα r
R2−αkr
+1(k ≤1)(−1)k+1Mτσ2
(29)
where
Jk (x) = 3F2
k + 1
2, k −δ, k + M; k + 1, k + 1 −δ; x
(30)
with 3F2(a1, a2, a3; b1, b2; z) denoting the generalized hyper-
geometric function.
Proof: See Appendix D.
Note that the coefﬁcients ck(r) in Proposition 2 can be
expressed based on the well-known hypergeometric function
rather than the inﬁnite summations as in Proposition 1 for
ad hoc networks, which are efﬁciently calculated in modern
numerical software. This illustrates that the cosine antenna
pattern enables a more tractable analysis for cellular networks.
We will use Proposition 1 as an approximation for the coverage
probability with the actual antenna pattern, while the accuracy
of the cosine antenna pattern will be veriﬁed in Section VI.
Furthermore, similar to Remark 3, the swap of two expecta-
tions operated in (15) enables the derivation of Proposition 2
and turns out to be an effective and tractable approach to tackle
complicated channel gain distributions in mm-wave networks.
Remark 6: With Proposition 2, we can numerically calculate
the required BS density as well as the minimum number of
antennas for a desirable coverage probability. Furthermore,
the optimal BS density that achieves the maximum coverage
probability, as we will see in Section VI-A, can also be
numerically determined by Proposition 2.
B. Impact of Directional Antenna Arrays
In the last subsection, we have derived an analytical result
for coverage probability of mm-wave cellular networks with
the cosine antenna pattern. However, it is difﬁcult to further
analyze the impact of directional antenna arrays since there
is an extra integral of the induced ℓ1-norm of the matrix
exponential, which contains the array size parameter Nt. As
an alternative, a lower bound for the coverage probability in
Proposition 2 is provided next, based on which we will present
the impact directional antenna arrays.
Corollary 2. A lower bound of the coverage probability (28)
is given by
pcos
c (τ) ≥
1 −e−πλbR2 exp
Nt(1 −e−πλbR2)DM
(31)
The nonzero entries in DM determined by
dk = 2λΓ
 k + 1
Γ(M + k)τ k
√πd(k!)2(αk −2)Γ(M)
yk (−τ) −(πλb)2R2−αk
Z R2
e−πλbrr
2 Jk
Rα r
+1(k ≤1)(−1)k+1Mτσ2
βPt (πλb)
1 + 1
δ , πλbR2
(32)
where γ(s, x) is the lower incomplete gamma function [27,
Page 890] and
yk(x) = Jk(x)
1 −e−πλbR2  1 + πλbR2i
+1(k = 0)
πλbR2 −1 + e−πλbR2
(33)
Proof: See Appendix E.
With this lower bound, the integrand no longer involves the
induced ℓ1-norm of a matrix exponential, which creates the
possibility to disclose the impact of antenna arrays as stated
in the following corollary.
Corollary 3. The lower bound of the coverage probability
(28) is a non-decreasing concave function of the array size,
and it can be rewritten as
pcos
c (t) ≥
1 −e−πλbR2
eβ0t
βntn
(34)
where t =
Nt is the inverse of the array size and
βn =
1 −e−πλbR2
n = 0,
∥(DM −d0IM)n∥1
 1 −e−πλbR2
n ≥1.
(35)
When t →0, i.e., Nt →∞, the asymptotic outage probability
is given by
˜pcos
o (t) ∼µ
+ e−πλbR2,
(36)
where µ = −PM−1
n=0 dn > 0.
Proof: The proof is similar to that of Corollary 1.
It turns out that this lower bound of the coverage probability
with the array size is quite similar to that in mm-wave ad
hoc networks, yet with additional terms brought by the user
association. This similarity shows that the impact of directional
antenna arrays in mm-wave networks does not depend much
on the user association strategy. Although this result is based
on the cosine antenna pattern and a lower bound, later we will
show its accuracy via simulations. Similar to Remark 5, the
key tool here is the analytical framework proposed in Section
III, which enables us to investigate the impact of antenna
arrays in mm-wave cellular networks.
VI. NUMERICAL RESULTS
In this section, we will present numerical results of coverage
probabilities in both mm-wave ad hoc and cellular networks.
We assume that the bandwidth is 1 GHz, and the transmit

--- PAGE BREAK ---

10-6
10-5
10-4
10-3
BS Density (m-2)
Coverage Probability
SINR
SINR w/o NLOS
(a) SINR, SIR, and SNR coverage probabilities in mm-wave
cellular networks when R = 200 m, Nt = 64, τ = 10 dB,
M = 3, and α = 2.1.
10-5
10-4
10-3
10-2
Node Density (m -2)
Coverage Probability
SINR
SINR w/o NLOS
(b) SINR, SIR, and SNR coverage probabilities in mm-wave
ad hoc networks when R = 180 m, Nt = 64, τ = 5 dB,
M = 5, α = 2.2, and r0 = 25 m.
Fig. 3. The impact of NLOS signals and interference in mm-wave (a) cellular networks and (b) ad hoc networks.
power of each BS is set as 1 Watt. The separation between the
antenna elements is d = λ
4 , i.e., quarter-wavelength to avoid
the grating lobes. From the recent measurements of mm-wave
signal propagations [5], the path loss exponent α is close to
2 and the intercept is β = −61.4 dB. All simulation results
shown in this section are averaged over 5 × 105 realizations.
A. The Role of NLOS Signals and Interference
In Section II-A, we stated the assumption that NLOS
signals and NLOS interference are negligible in mm-wave
networks, which will be justiﬁed in this subsection. To model
the NLOS signals and interference, we set the propagation
parameters as follows: the path loss exponent is αNLOS = 4
and the intercept is βNLOS = −72 dB [5]. Due to the richer
reﬂections and scattering environment of NLOS propagations,
Rayleigh fading is assumed as the small-scale propagation
model of the NLOS signals and interference. According to
recent measurements, a practical value of the LOS ball radius
R should be in the order of hundred meters [21].
In Fig. 3(a), we show a simulation of the SINR coverage
probability without incorporating the NLOS serving BS and
NLOS interferers, whose curve almost coincides with that in-
cluding NLOS components. This demonstrates that the impact
of NLOS signals and interference is negligible and validates
the LOS assumption made in Section II-A, i.e., we only need
to focus on the analysis where the typical receiver is associated
with a LOS transmitter and the interference is brought by
LOS interferers. The underlying reasons are as follows for
different BS densities: 1) When the BS density is low, the
network is operating in the noise-limited regime, and thus
only LOS signal matters; 2) At medium BS densities, there
is a certain probability to have a LOS serving BS, and the
interference gradually affects the SINR coverage. However,
the LOS interference power is much higher compared to the
NLOS ones. On the other hand, when the typical link is NLOS,
it is difﬁcult to achieve a satisfactory SINR value; 3) Very
dense mm-wave networks will be LOS interference-limited,
which has been investigated in [1], [9].
For mm-wave ad hoc networks, the typical dipole pair
is assumed to be LOS. As explained in Section IV-A, the
coverage probability is unsatisfactory due to the huge path
loss and high noise power when the signal link is NLOS. Fig.
3(b) demonstrates the impact of NLOS interferers when the
tagged transmitter is in the LOS condition. It manifests that,
with a LOS transmitter associated with the typical receiver, the
NLOS interference is also negligible for the reasons which are
similar to those in cellular networks [8].
Hence, it is reasonable to neglect the NLOS components in
the analysis for mm-wave networks. Although we showed that
NLOS parts are minor, note that all the simulations include
them to maintain the completeness and consistency. Moreover,
we retain the actual antenna pattern (7) in the remaining
simulations.
B. Coverage Analysis
The effects of noise and interference in mm-wave net-
works are also investigated. In Fig. 3(a), we evaluate the
signal-to-interference ratio (SIR) and signal-to-noise (SNR)
coverage probabilities versus the BS density in mm-wave
cellular networks. It was found in [20] that the SIR coverage
probability will monotonically decrease with the increasing
BS density in sub-6 GHz networks with the dual-slope path
loss model, which, however, no longer holds in mm-wave
cellular networks. This is because the difference in the small-
scale fading for LOS and NLOS propagations in mm-wave
networks, which were assumed to be the same in [20]. When
the BS density gradually increases, the signal link tends to
experience Nakagami fading rather than Rayleigh fading. This
change in small-scale fading results in a slight increase of
the SIR coverage probability, which also implicitly illustrates
that Nakagami fading provides better coverage than Rayleigh
fading. Therefore, as a lower bound of both SIR and SNR
coverage probabilities, the SINR coverage probability in mm-
wave cellular networks has a peak value with the increasing
BS density. On the other hand, different from mm-wave
cellular networks, the SINR coverage probability decreases

--- PAGE BREAK ---

SINR Threshold (dB)
Coverage Probability
Simulation
(Actual antenna pattern)
Analytical with eq. (22)
(Sinc antenna pattern)
r0=30 m, R=300 m, Nt=128, 
6b=5#10-3 m-2, M=4, ,=2.5
r0=25 m, R=200 m, Nt=64, 
6b=1#10-3 m-2, M=3, ,=2.1
(a) Coverage probability in mm-wave ad hoc networks.
SINR Threshold (dB)
Coverage Probability
Simulation
(Actual antenna pattern)
Analytical with eq. (28)
(Cosine antenna pattern)
Analytical with eq. (31)
(Lower bound with cosine antenna pattern)
(b) Coverage probability in mm-wave cellular networks when
R = 200 m, Nt = 128, λb = 1 × 10−3 m−2, M = 3, and
α = 2.1.
Fig. 4. Coverage analysis using (a) Proposition 1 for mm-wave ad hoc networks, and (b) Proposition 2 and Corollary 2 for mm-wave cellular networks.
with network densiﬁcation due to the ﬁxed dipole distance and
arbitrarily close interferers, which is shown in Fig. 3(b). This
evaluation indicates the importance of analyzing the SINR
distribution in mm-wave cellular networks, while the SIR
coverage can be used as a good metric for mm-wave ad hoc
networks.
In this subsection, we will verify our analytical results
in Sections IV and V through simulations. In Fig. 4(a), the
SINR coverage probabilities for mm-wave ad hoc networks are
evaluated. It can be seen that the analytical results match the
simulations with negligible gaps, which implies the accuracy
of the bound in Proposition 1. In Remark 1, we mentioned that
using ﬁnite terms for the summations in {ck}M−1
k=0 is sufﬁcient.
In the numerical evaluation of Proposition 1 in Fig. 4(a), we
only use 5 terms in the summations and it turns out that the
higher-order terms are negligible for practical evaluation.
In Fig. 4(b), the coverage probability for a mm-wave cellular
network is evaluated. We see that both the analytical results in
Proposition 2 and Corollary 2 give an approximate coverage
probability with minor gaps. The expression in Proposition 2
yields a very good approximation for smaller SINR thresholds
and a tight bound for larger ones. This is because the major
approximations made in the cosine antenna pattern (9) are on
the side lobe gains that are approximated to be zeros, while the
main lobe gains are approximated accurately with the cosine
function. When the SINR threshold gets large, the interference
power is smaller, which also means the interference is more
likely to be produced by side lobe gains. Therefore, the gap
will gradually increase due to the relatively crude approxima-
tion of the side lobe gains.
The analytical result in Corollary 2 provides a lower bound
of the expression in Proposition 2. Although it is not guaran-
teed to be a lower or upper bound of the exact SINR coverage
probability, it gives a good approximation as shown in Fig.
4(b), with more analytical tractability and potential for further
analysis, which will be discussed in detail in the next subsec-
tion. The results presented in Fig. 4(b) show the effectiveness
and rationale of the proposed cosine antenna pattern (9) in
coverage analysis for mm-wave cellular networks, which is an
ideal candidate for further performance analysis in mm-wave
cellular networks.
C. Impact of Directional Antenna Arrays
In this subsection, we will discuss the impact of directional
antenna arrays on coverage probability in mm-wave networks4.
Fig. 5(a) demonstrates that the analytical result in Corollary
1 for mm-wave ad hoc networks well matches the simulation
result. We see that the increase of the array size leads to an
improvement of the coverage probability, which conﬁrms the
monotonicity property in Corollary 1. In the following, we
provide some intuitive explanations for this phenomenon. The
increase of the array size increases the maximum array gain
for both signal and interference at the same pace, in proportion
to the array size, and therefore there is almost no performance
gain from increasing the maximum array gain via enlarging the
array size. Nevertheless, another effect of the increasing array
size for the interference is the narrowing of the beams, which
reduces the probability that the interferers direct the main lobes
towards the typical receiver. Moreover, note that the lower
bound derived in Corollary 1 is non-decreasing concave, which
means that the beneﬁts on the coverage from leveraging more
antennas gradually diminishes with the increasing antenna
size. In addition, we discover that the increase of the Nakagami
parameter M results in an increase of the coverage probability.
In Fig. 5(b), the impact of antenna arrays in mm-wave
cellular networks is investigated. For the analytical result,
we evaluate the coverage probability using the expression
in Corollary 3, which gives a lower bound of the coverage
probability adopting the cosine antenna pattern. Although
Rayleigh fading, i.e., M = 1, is only a special case for
the analysis in this paper and not suitable for LOS mm-
wave channels, it is valuable to examine this special case for
checking the lower bound in Corollary 3. As stated in Section
4In Figs. 5(a) and 5(b), the x-axes are reversed, and the y-axes are in the
logarithm scale.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Inverse of Antenna Size
#10-3
0.82
0.84
0.86
0.88
0.92
0.94
0.96
0.98
Coverage Probability
Simulation
(Actual antenna pattern)
Analytical with eq. (25)
(Sinc antenna pattern)
Asymptotic result with eq. (27)
(Sinc antenna pattern)
M=3, 5, 7
(a) Impact of antenna arrays in mm-wave ad hoc networks when
R = 200 m, τ = 5 dB, λb = 1 × 10−3 m−2, α = 2.1, and
r0 = 25 m.
Inverse of Antenna Size
#10-3
0.86
0.88
0.92
0.94
0.96
0.98
Coverage Probability
Simulation
(Actual antenna pattern)
Analytical with eq. (34)
(Lower bound with cosine antenna pattern)
Asymptotic result with eq. (36)
(Lower bound with cosine antenna pattern)
(b) Impact of antenna arrays in mm-wave cellular networks
when R = 200 m, τ = 5 dB, λb = 1 × 10−3 m−2, and
α = 2.1.
Fig. 5. Investigation on the impact of antenna arrays using (a) Corollary 1 for mm-wave ad hoc networks, and (b) Corollary 3 for mm-wave cellular networks.
IV-B, when M = 1, the lower bound (34) will reduce to an
exponential one, which is linear in the logarithm scale shown
in Fig. 5(b). When the Nakagami parameter M increases, the
polynomial term will take effect to make the lower bound
to be a non-decreasing concave one. It turns out that the
lower bound derived in Corollary 3 can be regraded as an
effective expression for analyzing the impact of directional
antenna arrays in mm-wave cellular networks, and that the
cosine antenna pattern is a satisfactory surrogate of the actual
antenna pattern for tractable analysis in mm-wave networks.
VII. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we ﬁrst proposed a general framework for
coverage analysis in mm-wave networks. It was then applied
to derive new tractable expressions of coverage probabilities
for mm-wave ad hoc and cellular networks, where two ap-
proximate antenna patterns with good accuracy and analyt-
ical tractability were adopted. We have shown that, as the
network density increases, the coverage probability reaches
a peak in mm-wave cellular networks, while it monotonically
decreases in ad hoc networks. More importantly, analytical
results show that the coverage probabilities of both types of
networks increase as a non-decreasing concave function with
the antenna array size. It will be interesting to extend the
proposed analytical framework to more advanced precoding
techniques, e.g., hybrid precoding [29], [30]. Moreover, a
coverage analysis that includes the beam misalignment caused
by the imperfect channel information also is a promising future
research direction.
APPENDIX A
Deﬁning xn = (−s)n
L(n)(s), the coverage probability (12)
can be expressed as
pc(τ) = Er0
"M−1
(37)
where x0 = L(s) = exp{η(s)} is given in Lemma 2. Next,
we will express xn in a recursive form. It is obvious that
L(1)(s) = η(1)(s)L(s), and according to the formula of
Leibniz for the n-th derivative of the product of two functions
[33], we have
L(n)(s) = dn−1
ds L(1)(s) =
n −1
η(n−i)(s)L(i)(s),
(38)
followed by
(−s)n
L(n)(s) =
n −i
(−s)(n−i)
(n −i)! η(n−i)(s)(−s)i
L(i)(s).
(39)
Therefore, the recursive relationship of xn is
xn =
n −i
cn−ixi,
ck = (−s)k
η(k)(s).
(40)
We deﬁne two power series as follows to solve for xn,
C(z) ≜
cnzn,
X(z) ≜
xnzn.
(41)
Following the method in [26, Appendix A], using the prop-
erties that C(1)(z) = P∞
n=0 ncnzn−1 and C(z)X(z) =
i=0 cn−ixizn, from (40), we obtain the differential
equation
X(1)(z) = C(1)(z)X(z),
(42)
whose solution is
X(z) = exp {C(z)} .
(43)
Therefore, according to (37), (41) and (43), the coverage
probability is given by
pc(τ) = Er0
"M−1
= Er0
"M−1
n! X(n)(z)
= Er0
"M−1
dzn eC(z)
(44)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

From [34, Page 14], the ﬁrst M coefﬁcients of the power
series eC(z) form the ﬁrst column of the matrix exponential
exp{CM}, whose exponent is given in (18).
Equation (44) can be further expressed as (17). Furthermore,
due to the fact
dzEp(z) = −Ep−1(z), the coefﬁcients can be
recast as (45). It can be proved that z2−αkE1+δ−k(z) is a
monotone decreasing function with respect to z, and therefore
the coefﬁcients ck > 0 for k ≥1. Summing up what has been
mentioned above completes the proof of Theorem 1.
APPENDIX B
Since κ = 0 in mm-wave ad hoc networks, (16) can be
simpliﬁed as
R2 −δR2Eg
E1+δ(sR−αg)
= R2 −δR2
R2 Γ (−δ) Eg
(−s)p
Rαpp! (p −δ)Eg [gp]
= δR2
(−s)p
Rαpp! (p −δ)Eg [gp] −δsδΓ (−δ) Eg
= δR2
(−s)pΓ(M + p)
Rαpp! (p −δ) Γ(M)M p
sin2k   πd
λ Ntθ
  πd
λ Ntθ
−δsδΓ (−δ) Γ (M + δ)
Γ(M)M δ
  πd
λ Ntθ
λ Ntθ
≤R2λ
αdNt
(−s)p
2p−1
Γ(M + p)
Rαp(2p −1)!p! (p −δ) Γ(M)M p
−δsδλ
πdNt
Γ (−δ) Γ (M + δ)
Γ(M)M δ ξ,
(46)
where (b) is from the series expansion of the generalized
exponential integral. Step (c) follows Lemma 3, and the upper
bound is derived by extending the integral upper limit to
inﬁnity given that, for the tiny ripple tails of the 2k-th power
of the sinc, the additional integration values are extremely
small and thus the upper bound in (c) is tight. Therefore, the
exponent of the Laplace transform is given by
η(s) = −πR2λbλ
αdNt
(−s)p
2p−1
Γ(M + p)
Rαp(2p −1)!p! (p −δ) Γ(M)M p
+ δsδλbλ
Γ (−δ) Γ (M + δ)
Γ(M)M δ ξ −
βPtNt
(47)
The coefﬁcients in Proposition 1 can be easily obtained via
taking the k-th derivative of (47).
APPENDIX C
According to (13), the Laplace transform of noise and
interference is
L(s) = x0 = exp{η(s)}
= exp
 −sσ2
n −πλbR2 
1 −δEg
E1+δ(sR−αg)
(48)
Note that 1 −δEg [E1+δ(sR−αg)] is a positive term due to
the facts that E1+δ(z) is a monotone decreasing function of
z and E1+δ(0) = 1
δ . Hence, the Laplace transform x0 is non-
decreasing with the antenna array size Nt, where η(s) is given
in (47). According to the recursive relationship (40) between
xn, it turns out that every xn is a non-decreasing function of
Nt. Recalling that pc(τ) = Er0
hPM−1
n=0 xn
, the monotonicity
in Corollary 1 has been proved, and the concavity of the lower
bound can be proved via similar steps.
We ﬁrst write CM in the form
CM = c0IM + (CM −c0IM),
(49)
where the ﬁrst term is a scalar matrix. Since CM is a lower
triangular Toeplitz matrix, the second part is a nilpotent matrix,
i.e., (CM −c0IM)n = 0 for n ≥M. Hence, according to the
properties of matrix exponential, we have
= ec0
(CM −c0IM)
(50)
Since Theorem 1 has shown that ck > 0 for k ≥1, CM−c0IM
is a strictly lower triangular Toeplitz matrix with all positive
entries, and so are the matrices (CM −c0IM)n. Therefore,
= ec0
∥(CM −c0IM)n∥1
(51)
which completes the proof of Corollary (25). When t →0, by
omitting the higher order terms, the linear Taylor expansion
of the coverage is
∼1+c0 + ∥CM −c0IM∥1
= 1+
PM−1
n=0 cn
(52)
where the slope
cn =
(−s)n
η(n)(s)
= η(0) = 0.
(53)
Step (d) follows the fact that ck > 0 for k ≥1 as proved
in Appendix A, and (e) follows from the Taylor expansion of
η(0) at point s.
APPENDIX D
Following similar steps as in Appendix B, (16) can be
derived as
 1 −Eg[exp(−sgx−α)]
= δR2
(−sR−α)k
k!(k −δ) Eg[gk] −δr2
(−sr−α
k!(k −δ) Eg[gk].
(54)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ck =
n + δπλbs
R2−αEg[gEδ(sR−αg)] −κ2−αEg[gEδ(sκ−αg)]
k = 1,
πδλbsk
R2−αkEg
gkE1+δ−k(sR−αg)
−κ2−αkEg
gkE1+δ−k(sκ−αg)
k ≥2.
(45)
Based on the cosine antenna pattern (9), we have
(−z)k
k!(k −δ)Eg[gk]
πdNt
(−z)k
k!(k −δ)
cos2k x
2 dx +
δdNt
√πdNt
(−z)kΓ
2 + k
(k!)2(k −δ)
δdNt
δdNt
1 −3F2
2, −δ, M; 1, 1 −δ; −z
(55)
where (f) inversely applies the deﬁnition (series expansion)
of the generalized hypergeometric function [27, Page 1000].
Substituting (55) into (54), the exponent of the Laplace
transform is given by
η(s) = −sσ2
βPtNt
−πλbλ
−sr−α
−sR−α
(56)
Note that the derivative for the generalized hypergeometric
function is
dz 3F2(a1, a2, a3; b1, b2; z)
i=1 ai
j=1 bj
3F2(a1 + 1, a2 + 1, a3 + 1; b1 + 1, b2 + 1; z).
(57)
Based on this expression and Theorem 1, the entries in CM
in Proposition 2 are obtained.
APPENDIX E
Similar to Appendix A, we deﬁne a power series
Q(z) ≜Er0 [X(z)] =
qnzn.
(58)
Recall that X(z) = exp{C(z)} in (43), and we obtain the
following lower bound with a slight abuse of notation due to
the fact that C(z) is a function of r0 in cellular networks,
Q(z) = πλb
Z R2
−πλbr + 1
C(z; r)
= πλb
Z R2
e−πλbr exp
ck(r)zk
1 −e−πλbR2
Nt(1 −e−πλbR2)
 Z R2
e−πλbrck(r)dr
1 −e−πλbR2
Nt(1 −e−πλbR2)D(z; r)
(59)
fact,
Q(z)
viewed
1 −e−πλbR2
Nt C(z; r′
random
variable with pdf fr′
0(r) =
1−e−πλbR2 e−πλbr. Due to the
convexity of the exponential function, we apply Jensen’s
inequality in (g) and obtain the lower bound. Therefore, the
coverage probability is given by
pcos
c (τ) =
dzn Q(z)|z=0 ,
(60)
which can be further expressed as in Corollary 3.
REFERENCES
[1] X. Yu, J. Zhang, and K. B. Letaief, “Coverage analysis for dense
millimeter wave cellular networks: The impact of array size,” in Proc.
IEEE Wireless Commun. Netw. Conf. (WCNC), Doha, Qatar, Apr. 2016,
pp. 1–6.
[2] S. Hur, T. Kim, D. J. Love, J. V. Krogmeier, T. A. Thomas, and
A. Ghosh, “Millimeter wave beamforming for wireless backhaul and
access in small cell networks,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 10,
pp. 4391–4403, Oct. 2013.
[3] T. S. Rappaport, R. W. Heath, Jr., R. C. Daniels, and J. N. Murdock,
Millimeter Wave Wireless Communications.
New York, NY, USA:
Pearson Education, 2014.
[4] W. Roh, J.-Y. Seol, J. Park, B. Lee, J. Lee, Y. Kim, J. Cho, K. Cheun, and
F. Aryanfar, “Millimeter-wave beamforming as an enabling technology
for 5G cellular communications: Theoretical feasibility and prototype
results,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 106–113, Feb. 2014.
[5] M. Akdeniz, Y. Liu, M. Samimi, S. Sun, S. Rangan, T. Rappaport,
and E. Erkip, “Millimeter wave channel modeling and cellular capacity
evaluation,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 32, no. 6, pp. 1164–1179,
Jun. 2014.
[6] S. Singh, M. N. Kulkarni, and J. G. Andrews, “A tractable model for
rate in noise limited mmWave cellular networks,” in Proc. 48th Asilomar
Conf. Signals, Syst. and Comput., Paciﬁc Grove, CA, USA, Nov. 2014,
pp. 1911–1915.
[7] K. Venugopal, M. C. Valenti, and R. W. Heath, Jr., “Interference in ﬁnite-
sized highly dense millimeter wave networks,” in Proc. Inf. Theory and
Appl. (ITA), San Diego, CA, USA, Feb. 2015, pp. 175 –180.
[8] A. Thornburg, T. Bai, and R. W. Heath, Jr., “Performance analysis
of outdoor mmWave ad hoc networks,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process.,
vol. 64, no. 15, pp. 4065–4079, Aug. 2016.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

[9] T. Bai and R. W. Heath, Jr., “Coverage and rate analysis for millimeter-
wave cellular networks,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 14, no. 2,
pp. 1100–1114, Feb. 2015.
[10] M. D. Renzo, “Stochastic geometry modeling and analysis of multi-
tier millimeter wave cellular networks,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun.,
vol. 14, no. 9, pp. 5038–5057, Sep. 2015.
[11] G. Lee, Y. Sung, and J. Seo, “Randomly-directional beamforming
in millimeter-wave multiuser MISO downlink,” IEEE Trans. Wireless
Commun., vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 1086–1100, Feb. 2016.
[12] G. Lee, Y. Sung, and M. Kountouris, “On the performance of random
beamforming in sparse millimeter wave channels,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics
Signal Process., vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 560–575, Apr. 2016.
[13] F. Babich and M. Comisso, “A reliable approach for modeling the actual
antenna pattern in millimeter-wave communication,” IEEE Commun.
Lett., vol. 19, no. 8, pp. 1335–1338, Aug. 2015.
[14] D. Maamari, N. Devroye, and D. Tuninetti, “Coverage in mmWave
cellular networks with base station co-operation,” IEEE Trans. Wireless
Commun., vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 2981–2994, Apr. 2016.
[15] A. Thornburg and R. W. Heath, Jr., “Ergodic capacity in mmWave ad hoc
network with imperfect beam alignment,” in Proc. IEEE Mil. Commun.
Conf. (MILCOM), Tampa, FL, USA, Oct. 2015, pp. 1479–1484.
[16] J. Helander, K. Zhao, Z. Ying, and D. Sj¨oberg, “Performance analysis
of millimeter-wave phased array antennas in cellular handsets,” IEEE
Antennas Wireless Propag. Lett., vol. 15, pp. 504–507, Mar. 2016.
[17] A. Ghosh, T. A. Thomas, M. C. Cudak, R. Ratasuk, P. Moorut,
F. W. Vook, T. S. Rappaport, G. R. MacCartney, S. Sun, and S. Nie,
“Millimeter-wave enhanced local area systems: A high-data-rate ap-
proach for future wireless networks,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun.,
vol. 32, no. 6, pp. 1152–1163, Jun. 2014.
[18] M. Haenggi, Stochastic Geometry for Wireless Networks.
Cambridge,
U.K.: Cambridge University Press, 2012.
[19] A. Guo and M. Haenggi, “Spatial stochastic models and metrics for the
structure of base stations in cellular networks,” IEEE Trans. Wireless
Commun., vol. 12, no. 11, pp. 5800–5812, Nov. 2013.
[20] X. Zhang and J. G. Andrews, “Downlink cellular network analysis with
multi-slope path loss models,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 63, no. 5,
pp. 1881–1894, May 2015.
[21] J. G. Andrews, T. Bai, M. N. Kulkarni, A. Alkhateeb, A. K. Gupta,
and R. W. Heath, “Modeling and analyzing millimeter wave cellular
systems,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 65, no. 1, pp. 403–430, Jan. 2017.
[22] A. Alkhateeb, G. Leus, and R. W. Heath, Jr., “Limited feedback hybrid
precoding for multi-user millimeter wave systems,” IEEE Trans. Wireless
Commun., vol. 14, no. 11, pp. 6481–6494, Nov. 2015.
[23] J. Brady, N. Behdad, and A. M. Sayeed, “Beamspace MIMO for
millimeter-wave communications: System architecture, modeling, anal-
ysis, and measurements,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 61, no. 7,
pp. 3814–3827, Jul. 2013.
[24] C. A. Balanis, Antenna Theory: Analysis and Design.
Hoboken, NJ,
USA: John Wiley & Sons, 2005.
[25] C. Li, J. Zhang, and K. B. Letaief, “Throughput and energy efﬁciency
analysis of small cell networks with multi-antenna base stations,” IEEE
Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 13, no. 5, pp. 2505–2517, May 2014.
[26] C. Li, J. Zhang, J. G. Andrews, and K. B. Letaief, “Success probability
and area spectral efﬁciency in multiuser MIMO HetNets,” IEEE Trans.
Commun., vol. 64, no. 4, pp. 1544–1556, Apr. 2016.
[27] D. Zwillinger, Table of integrals, series, and products.
Amsterdam,
Netherlands: Elsevier, 2014.
[28] J. G. Andrews, F. Baccelli, and R. K. Ganti, “A tractable approach to
coverage and rate in cellular networks,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 59,
no. 11, pp. 3122–3134, Nov. 2011.
[29] O. El Ayach, S. Rajagopal, S. Abu-Surra, Z. Pi, and R. W. Heath, Jr.,
“Spatially sparse precoding in millimeter wave MIMO systems,” IEEE
Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 1499–1513, Mar. 2014.
[30] X. Yu, J.-C. Shen, J. Zhang, and K. B. Letaief, “Alternating minimization
algorithms for hybrid precoding in millimeter wave MIMO systems,”
IEEE J. Sel. Topics Signal Process., vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 485–500, Apr.
2016.
[31] S. L. Cotton, W. G. Scanlon, and B. K. Madahar, “Millimeter-wave
soldier-to-soldier communications for covert battleﬁeld operations,”
IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 47, no. 10, pp. 72–81, Oct. 2009.
[32] J. Qiao, X. S. Shen, J. W. Mark, Q. Shen, Y. He, and L. Lei, “En-
abling device-to-device communications in millimeter-wave 5G cellular
networks,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 209–215, Jan. 2015.
[33] S. Roman, “The formula of Faa di Bruno,” The American Mathematical
Monthly, vol. 87, no. 10, pp. 805–809, Dec. 1980.
[34] P. Henrici, Applied and computational complex analysis.
New York,
NY, USA: John Wiley & Sons, 1988.
Xianghao Yu (S’15) received the B.Eng. degree in
Information Engineering from Southeast University
(SEU), Nanjing, China, in 2014. He is currently
working towards the Ph.D. degree in Electronic and
Computer Engineering at the Hong Kong University
of Science and Technology (HKUST), under the
supervision of Prof. Khaled B. Letaief. His research
interests include millimeter wave communications,
MIMO systems, mathematical optimization, and
stochastic geometry.
Jun Zhang (S’06-M’10-SM’15) received the B.Eng.
degree in Electronic Engineering from the University
of Science and Technology of China in 2004, the
M.Phil. degree in Information Engineering from the
Chinese University of Hong Kong in 2006, and the
Ph.D. degree in Electrical and Computer Engineer-
ing from the University of Texas at Austin in 2009.
He is currently a Research Assistant Professor in
the Department of Electronic and Computer Engi-
neering at the Hong Kong University of Science and
Technology (HKUST). His current research interests
include dense wireless cooperative networks, mobile edge caching and com-
puting, cloud computing, and data analytics systems.
Dr. Zhang co-authored the book Fundamentals of LTE (Prentice-Hall,
2010). He is a recipient of the 2016 Marconi Prize Paper Award in Wireless
Communications, the 2016 Young Author Best Paper Awards by the IEEE
Signal Processing Society (co-author), the 2014 Best Paper Award for the
EURASIP JOURNAL ON ADVANCES IN SIGNAL PROCESSING, an IEEE
ICC Best Paper Award in 2016, and an IEEE PIMRC Best Paper Award
in 2014. He also received the 2016 IEEE ComSoc Asia-Paciﬁc Best Young
Researcher Award. He is an Editor of IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS
COMMUNICATIONS, and is a guest editor of the special section on “Mobile
Edge Computing for Wireless Networks” in IEEE Access. He frequently
serves on the technical program committees of major IEEE conferences in
wireless communications, such as ICC, Globecom, WCNC, VTC, etc., and
served as a MAC track co-chair for IEEE WCNC 2011.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Martin Haenggi (S’95-M’99-SM’04-F’14) received
the Dipl.-Ing. (M.Sc.) and Dr.sc.techn. (Ph.D.) de-
grees in electrical engineering from the Swiss Fed-
eral Institute of Technology in Zurich (ETH) in 1995
and 1999, respectively. Currently he is the Freimann
Professor of electrical engineering and a Concurrent
Professor of applied and computational mathematics
and statistics at the University of Notre Dame, Indi-
ana, USA. In 2007-2008, he was a visiting professor
at the University of California at San Diego, and
in 2014-2015 he was an Invited Professor at EPFL,
Switzerland.
He is a co-author of the monograph “Interference in Large Wireless
Networks” (NOW Publishers, 2009) and the author of the textbook “Stochastic
Geometry for Wireless Networks” (Cambridge University Press, 2012), and
he published 14 single-author journal articles. His scientiﬁc interests include
networking and wireless communications, with an emphasis on cellular,
amorphous, ad hoc (including D2D and M2M), cognitive, and vehicular
networks.
He served an Associate Editor of the ELSEVIER JOURNAL OF AD HOC
NETWORKS, the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MOBILE COMPUTING (TMC),
the ACM TRANSACTIONS ON SENSOR NETWORKS, as a Guest Editor
for the IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, the
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, and the EURASIP
JOURNAL ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, as a
Steering Committee member of the TMC, and as the Chair of the Ex-
ecutive Editorial Committee of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS
COMMUNICATIONS (TWC). Currently he is the Editor-in-Chief of the TWC.
He also served as a Distinguished Lecturer for the IEEE Circuits and Systems
Society, as a TPC Co-chair of the Communication Theory Symposium of
the 2012 IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC’12), of
the 2014 International Conference on Wireless Communications and Signal
Processing (WCSP’14), and the 2016 International Symposium on Wireless
Personal Multimedia Communications (WPMC’16), as a General Co-chair of
the 2009 International Workshop on Spatial Stochastic Models for Wireless
Networks (SpaSWiN’09), and the 2012 DIMACS Workshop on Connectivity
and Resilience of Large-Scale Networks, as well as a Keynote Speaker at 10
international conferences and workshops.
For both his M.Sc. and Ph.D. theses, he was awarded the ETH medal, and
he received a CAREER award from the U.S. National Science Foundation in
2005 and the 2010 IEEE Communications Society Best Tutorial Paper award.
Khaled
Letaief
(S’85–M’86–SM’97–F’03)
received the BS degree with distinction in Electrical
Engineering
from
Purdue
University
West
Lafayette, Indiana, USA, in December 1984. He
received the MS and Ph.D. Degrees in Electrical
Engineering from Purdue University, in August
1986, and May 1990, respectively.
From 1990 to 1993, he was a faculty member
at the University of Melbourne, Australia. He has
been with the Hong Kong University of Science
& Technology since 1993 where he is known as
one of HKUSTs most distinguished professors. While at HKUST, he has
held numerous administrative positions, including Head of the Electronic
and Computer Engineering department, Director of Huawei Innovation
Laboratory, and Director of the Hong Kong Telecom Institute of Information
Technology. While at HKUST he has also served as Chair Professor and
Dean of Engineering. Under his leadership, the School has also dazzled in
international rankings (rising from #26 in 2009 to #14 in the world in 2015
according to QS World University Rankings.) From September 2015, he
joined HBKU as Provost to help establish a research-intensive university
in Qatar in partnership with esteemed universities that include Northwester
University, Cornell, CU, and Texas A&M.
Letaief
internationally
recognized
leader
wireless
communications with research interest in Green communications, Internet
of Things, Cloud-RANs, and 5G systems. In these areas, he has over 560
journal and conference papers and given keynote talks as well as courses all
over the world. He also has 15 patents, including 11 US patents.
Dr. Letaief served as consultants for different organizations including
Huawei, ASTRI, ZTE, Nortel, PricewaterhouseCoopers, and Motorola.
He is the founding Editor-in-Chief of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS and has served on the editorial board of
other prestigious journals. In addition to his active research and professional
activities, Professor Letaief has been a dedicated teacher committed to
excellence in teaching and scholarship. He received the Michael G. Gale
Medal for Distinguished Teaching (Highest university-wide teaching award
and only one recipient/year is honored for his/her contributions).
He is also the recipient of many other distinguished awards and honors
including the 2007 IEEE Joseph LoCicero Publications Exemplary Award,
2009 IEEE Marconi Prize Award in Wireless Communications, 2010 Purdue
University Outstanding Electrical and Computer Engineer Award, 2011 IEEE
Harold Sobol Award, 2016 IEEE Marconi Prize Paper Award in Wireless
Communications, and over 11 IEEE Best Paper Awards.
Dr. Letaief is recognized as a long time volunteer with dedicated service
to professional societies and in particular IEEE where he has served in many
leadership positions. These include Treasurer, Vice-President for Conferences
and Vice-President for Technical Activities of IEEE Communications
Society.
Dr. Letaief is a Fellow of IEEE and a Fellow of HKIE. He is also
recognized by Thomson Reuters as an ISI Highly Cited Researcher (which
places him among the top 250 preeminent individual researchers in the ﬁeld
of Computer Science and Engineering) and will be the President of IEEE
Communications Society in 2018.