User Field iucrjournal = 
User Field iucrfield =   User Field iucrcategory = 
The Relativistic Foundations of Synchrotron Radiation
G. Margaritondoa* and J. Rafelskib 
aEcole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Switzerland, 
bDepartment of Physics, The University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA
*Correspondence e-mail: giorgio.margaritondo@epfl.ch 
Special Relativity  (SR) determines the properties of synchrotron radiation, but the
corresponding  mechanisms  are  frequently misunderstood.  Time  dilation  is often
invoked among the causes, whereas its role would violate the principles of SR. We
show that the correct explanation of the synchrotron radiation properties is provided
by a combination of the Doppler shift, not dependent on time dilation effects, contrary
to a common belief, and of the Lorentz transformation into the particle reference
frame of the electromagnetic field of the emission-inducing device, also with no
contribution from time dilation. We close by reminding the reader that much if not all
of our argument has been available since the inception of SR, a research discipline
of its own standing. 
IMPORTANT: this document contains embedded data - to preserve data integrity, please ensure where possible that the IUCr 
Word tools (available from http://journals.iucr.org/services/docxtemplate/) are installed when editing this document.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

User Field iucrjournal = 
User Field iucrfield =   User Field iucrcategory = 
Synchrotron sources are one of the main practical applications of Einstein’s SR
(Einstein, 1905-1). Paradoxically, however, the relativistic effects that determine the
detected radiation features are typically presented in a misleading way. 
Consider the 22-term ubiquitously found in the spectral equations of synchrotron
radiation (Margaritondo, 2002). For example, the first-harmonic emitted wavelength
of an undulator is approximately proportional to L/(22), L being the undulator period,
and the photon energy bandwidth of a bending magnet is proportional to ≈22B, with
B = magnetic field strength. 
The ≈22-term actually originates from the product of two factors, ≈2  and , related
to two different relativistic phenomena. Let us consider what they are.
The ≈2-factor is due to the longitudinal Doppler shift occurring when the emission of
the  moving  electrons is observed  in  the  laboratory frame  R. Unfortunately, the
Doppler  shift  equations  are  frequently  derived  using  time  dilation,  which  is
fundamentally incorrect (Rafelski, 2017). The -factor is also often attributed to time
dilation, likewise a conceptual mistake.
Consider first the Doppler shift, using the geometry that is relevant to synchrotron
radiation: the source (the electron) has a longitudinal component of the velocity
directly towards the observer, with magnitude u ≈ c. Before treating the effects of this
movement, we must accurately define the “electron” reference frame R’. This is not
the frame moving with the electron (which would not be inertial since the electron is
accelerated  in  the  transverse  direction).  Rather,  it  is  the  frame  moving  with  a
constant velocity that is equal to the instantaneous longitudinal velocity component
of  the  electron.  In  this  frame,  the  electron  has  zero  longitudinal  speed  and
acceleration, but it can be transversely accelerated and emit radiation. 
To explain the relativistic Doppler shift for electromagnetic waves in vacuum, a
common but conceptually incorrect (Rafelski, 2017) approach - whose historical
origins are discussed below - adds time dilation to the non-relativistic Doppler effect,
e.g., for sound. The starting equation is, therefore:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

User Field iucrjournal = 
User Field iucrfield =   User Field iucrcategory = 
(1−u
where  and  ’ are the frequencies in R and R’, and c is the speed of the wave.
Then, the equation is modified for time dilation. The logic is that the time intervals
measured by clocks are increased by the factor  = (1 – u2/c2)-1/2 when going from R’
to R, so the frequencies should be reciprocally increased by the same factor from R
to R’, and: 
(1−u
1+ u
ν' ,
which in the limit u ≈ c becomes:
1+ u
≈2γν ' .
Paradoxically, these equations are correct (for a special line of sight) but the logic
above is not, as explained in (Rafelski, 2017, p. 172): “To understand the absurdity of
claims that the  SR-Doppler  [Special  Relativity-Doppler]  effect  is  created  at  the
source due to time dilation, the reader should consider not two but three different
observers,  e.g.  two different travelers and the laboratory source. There are three
different relative velocities. There are three different SR-Doppler shifts observed that
must be relative and reciprocal. The only way that this can be true is that the
Doppler shift is created by the method of observation and not by state of motion of
the source”. 
Regrettably, the incorrect time dilation explanation is what students frequently learn,
notably  from  Wikipedia  (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Relativistic_Doppler_effect),

--- PAGE BREAK ---

User Field iucrjournal = 
User Field iucrfield =   User Field iucrcategory = 
which  states “The  relativistic  Doppler effect  is different  from  the  non-relativistic
Doppler effect as the equations include the time dilation effect of special relativity”.
Actually, the origin of the misconception is much older: it can be traced to the SR text
(Resnick 1968) and subsequently percolated into popular teaching books like the
“Halliday-Resnick-Krane” physics manuals (Halliday et al. 2002). 
Resnick presented the Doppler shift and the line-of-sight aberration following von
Laue’s classic relativity text in German (von Laue 1960), which included the following
comment: “Die Wurzel √1−β
2  in 14.8 welche den quadratischen Doppler-Effekt
bedingt, stammt, wie man an Hand der Rechnung Zurüverfolgt, aus dem Nenner
√1−β
2  der Transformation (4.7). Da wir aus demselben Nenner in § 5a auf die
Zeitdilatation schlossen, finden wir auch hier den Zusammenhang zwischen dem
quadratischen  Effekt  und  der  Verlangsamung  des  Uhrenganges…”  A  correct
paraphrased translation is “...both the Doppler  -factor and time dilation  -factor
originate in the  -factor of the Lorentz transformation”. Instead, Resnick’s version
was:  “It  is  instructive  to  note  that  the  transverse  Doppler  effect  has  a  simple
time-dilation interpretation. ..... . The transverse Doppler effect is another physical
example  confirming  the  relativistic  time  dilation.”  The  use  of  the  words
“interpretation”  and  “confirming”  is  the  conceptual  mistake  that  influenced  the
subsequent  teaching  of  the  Doppler  effect  –  and  synchrotron  radiation  –  over
one-half century.
In essence, the above derivation of the Doppler shift and its time dilation argument
live in a hypothetical (and wrong) world filled with  material (or absolute) aether.
Consider the general Doppler effect for sound: the frequency of emitted waves
depends on the relative velocity of the source with respect to air; there is a second
shift if the observer also moves with respect to air. The time-dilation argument for the
Doppler shift of light uses the same logic: the emitted frequency is modified by the
relative motion of the source with respect to the carrier of emitted radiation, the
material aether. This thinking violates of course the principle of relativity by de facto
assuming that the modification is with respect to an absolute aether -- whereas
Einstein (Einstein, 1905-1) saved Galileo's principle of relativity by recognizing that it
is the observer who creates in the measurement process the Doppler shift for light.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

User Field iucrjournal = 
User Field iucrfield =   User Field iucrcategory = 
There is, in fact, no need to incorrectly invoke time dilation when deriving the
Doppler shift, as demonstrated in (Rafelski, 2017). Consider for simplicity a plane
and  linearly  polarized  wave  traveling  in  the  longitudinal  direction  z,  whose
(transverse) magnetic field magnitude can be written in the R’-frame as:
B'=Bo'sin[2π(
λ' −ν' t ')],
where ’ is the wavelength and ’ is the frequency. The phase factor of this wave
must be Lorentz-invariant, otherwise one could use phase-related effects to detect
the inertial motion of R’ with respect to R (or vice-versa), violating the principles of
SR (Einstein, 1905-1). Therefore:
λ' −ν ' t '= z
λ −νt.
Using the wave relations ’ = c/’ and  = c/ as well as the Lorentz transformations
for the longitudinal position and for the time, this equation gives:
c −t ')ν '=(
c −t)ν ;
γ (z−ut )
−γ(t −uz
2)]ν '=(
c −t)ν ;
γ(1+ u
c −t)ν'=(
c −t)ν ,
and, therefore:
ν= (1+ u
ν'=√
1+ u
ν' ,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

User Field iucrjournal = 
User Field iucrfield =   User Field iucrcategory = 
the same relativistic Doppler equation as above, but derived here without invoking
time dilation.
An alternate way to achieve the same objective is to Lorentz-transform the energy
carried  by  hypothetical  “energy  particles”  associated  with  the  wave  (Einstein’s
“photon hypothesis” (Einstein, 1905-2)). The procedure, reported in (Margaritondo,
1995), shows that:
1+ u
P' ,
where  P and  P’ are the particle energies in the two frames. Thus, assuming that
frequencies and particle energies are linearly related, P = h and and P’ = h’, one
obtains the Doppler shift equation, again without using time dilation. The bonus of
this approach is to shed light on an often-neglected link between relativity and
quantum electromagnetism. 
Before concluding the discussion of the Doppler effect, one should note that the
above discussion is only valid if one considers the transverse motion of the electron
as negligible with respect to the relativistic longitudinal motion. Strictly speaking, this
is not correct and one should use instead the general theory of the Doppler effect
valid for all directions of the source motion. This does not change the fact that
invoking time dilation is incorrect. But the transverse motion does have important
effects. For example, by increasing its amplitude one decreases the Doppler shift in
the  longitudinal  direction  -- an  effect  that  is  widely  exploited  [2]  to  control  the
undulator spectral emission by changing its magnetic field strength.
We shall now discuss the second relativistic effect in synchrotron radiation, which
causes the  term in the ≈22 factor. Here too, one should avoid the erroneous use of
time dilation since, quoting again (Rafelski, 2017, p. 172): “Light travels in space in a
way that must be completely independent of the state of motion of the source; there
cannot be an effect of motion of the source that can be ascribed to properties of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

User Field iucrjournal = 
User Field iucrfield =   User Field iucrcategory = 
emitted light”.
To understand this point, note that in all synchrotron radiation sources the emission
is triggered by a magnetic device such as a bending dipole, an undulator or a wiggler
(Margaritondo, 2002) -- which produces the transverse acceleration of the electron.
Consider for example the (transverse) magnetic field magnitude of an undulator,
assuming a simple oscillating form in the R-frame:
BU=BUosin[2π(
L)],
where  L is  again  the  undulator  period.  After  the  Lorentz  transformation  to  the
“electron” R’-frame, this field magnitude becomes:
BU'=γBUosin[2πγ(
z '+ut '
L )].
Furthermore, the transformation adds to the magnetic field a transverse electric field,
perpendicular to it and with magnitude:
EU '=γ(
2) B
For the relativistic limit u ≈ c, these last two equations become, approximately:
BU'=γBUosin[2πγ(
z '+ct'
L )];
EU '=γ(
These  can  be  recognized  (Margaritondo,  2002)  as  the  equations  of  an
electromagnetic  wave  moving  in  the  negative  longitudinal  direction  towards the
electron – with wavelength L/ and frequency c/L. The electric field of this “wave”

--- PAGE BREAK ---

User Field iucrjournal = 
User Field iucrfield =   User Field iucrcategory = 
acts on the electron whereas the magnetic field does not, since in R’ the longitudinal
velocity is zero and there is no Lorentz force. 
The interaction with the electron causes the elastic back scattering of the “wave” in
the  R’-frame:  this  is  the  mechanism  that  generates  synchrotron  radiation
(Margaritondo, 2002). The wavelength and the frequency of the back scattered wave
in R’ are the same as those of the original wave, L/ and c/L. Therefore, the emitted
frequency includes the factor   that contributes to the ≈22 term, which is thus
explained by the Lorentz field transformation without involving time dilation.
Such a result could be re-interpreted by noting that the L/ value of the wavelength
corresponds  to  the  Lorentz-contracted  undulator  period.  This  point  of  view  is
conceptually correct: the field transformation that defines the emission-triggering
object in R’ (the undulator “wave” that is back scattered) does include the longitudinal
contraction. 
One could likewise be tempted to re-interpret the factor  in the emitted frequency in
R’ as a reverse effect of the time dilation affecting the clocks in R’ when observed in
the laboratory frame. However, this interpretation falls in the same kind of conceptual
mistake discussed above (Rafelski, 2017). 
This is a subtle but very important point: an observer in the frame R’ would not know
the state of relative motion of the laboratory observer that will eventually detect the
radiation – who may not even exist. Therefore, one cannot expect this relative state
of motion to influence the emitted waves in R’. In a synchrotron radiation source,
what matters instead is the state of motion of the emission-triggering magnetic
device with respect to the electron, which only coincidentally is the same as that of
the potential laboratory observer of the radiation. The relative motion of the magnetic
device (and not that of the observer) with respect to the electron, treated with the
Lorentz transformation of the magnetic field, defines what  is the electromagnetic
system in R’ that interacts with the electron to produce synchrotron radiation. This
has nothing to do with the relative state of motion of the possible future laboratory

--- PAGE BREAK ---

User Field iucrjournal = 
User Field iucrfield =   User Field iucrcategory = 
observer, and in particular with the time dilation between the electron frame and this
observer’s frame.
To further clarify this point, we should note that having the same reference frame for
the undulator and for the laboratory observer is only a practical matter. But there is
no fundamental reason for not imagining the undulator and the laboratory observer
moving in different ways with respect to the electron. In that case, the 22 term would
be replaced by 2eOeB, where the two factors  eO and  eB correspond to the two
distinct relative motions, electron-observer and electron-undulator. 
The eB term enhances the strength of the transverse electromagnetic field in the R’
(“electron”) frame and changes its periodicity. In other words, it determines what is in
the same frame of the "apparatus" causing the electron to emit radiation. The  eO
term is instead the relativistic gamma factor of an observer measuring the emitted
radiation that already left the apparatus and is on its way. This line of reasoning
clarifies why the state of motion of the final observer with respect to the source
cannot influence the emission properties in R’. 
Similar conclusions are valid for other types of synchrotron sources. For bending
magnets, for example, the Lorentz transformation of the field gives in the R’-frame a
transverse electric field with a factor of   -- which then is found in the emitted
wavelength and frequency. As for the case of undulators, the Lorentz-transformed
field fully defines what really is, in R’, the emission-inducing electromagnetic device.
In conclusion, the ≈22 term in the spectral equations of synchrotron radiation is the
result of two different relativistic effects: the longitudinal Doppler effect and the
Lorentz transformation of the magnetic field of the device that induces the emission.
Neither one of them should be attributed, even in part, to the time dilation affecting
the clocks in the “electron” frame when seen in the observer (laboratory) frame – as
is frequently and unfortunately done.
Note that nothing we described above is new. Our ideas were already present in
Einstein's work of 1905  (Einstein, 1905-1). So, closing this discussion we ask the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

User Field iucrjournal = 
User Field iucrfield =   User Field iucrcategory = 
question: how could it be that after more than one century we are correcting some of
the common views about synchrotron radiation phenomena? We discussed already
how the wrong understanding of relativity phenomena started to infiltrate textbooks
about 50 years ago. One should not neglect, however, another serious problem: SR
is often not taught as a separate discipline, and “General Relativity” tends to be seen
as its teaching home. This feeds conceptual misunderstandings about SR, as its
effects  are  often  confused  with  modifications  of  space-time.  The  ensuing
misconceptions specifically affect synchrotron  radiation  phenomena, but are  not
limited to them: the Lorentz contraction of material bodies is another example. 
The clarification of the origin of the synchrotron radiation factor 22 described in this
article hopefully assures that modeling and technological improvements are in the
future well aligned with foundational principles of SR. Our discussion of the origins of
misleading views about the principles of relativity should help the readers – in
particular teachers and students - to critically reject texts and web resources that
propagate  conceptual  misunderstandings  about  the  Doppler  effect  and  about
synchrotron radiation in general.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

User Field iucrjournal = 
User Field iucrfield =   User Field iucrcategory = 
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL)
and by its Center for Biomedical Imaging (CIBM).
References
Einstein, A.  (1905-1). Ann. Phys. 17, 891-921. 
Einstein, A.  (1905-2). Ann. Phys. 17, 132-148. 
Margaritondo, G. (2002). Elements of Synchrotron Light for Biology, Chemistry, and
Medical Research, New York: Oxford.
Margaritondo, G. (1995). Eur. J. Phys. 16, 169-171.
Rafelski,  J.  (2017)  Relativity  Matters:  From  Einstein's  EMC2  to  Laser  Particle
Acceleration and Quark-Gluon Plasma, Berlin: Springer.
Resnick, R. (1968). Introduction to Special Relativity, New York: J. Wiley, ppp. 90-91.
von  Laue,  M.  (1960)  Die  Relativitätstheorie,  Braunschweig:  Vieweg;  7.  durch-
gesehene Auflage pp. 101-2.
Halliday, D., Resnick, R., Krane, K. S. (2002) Physics, New York: J. Wiley see in this
4th edition Volume 2 extended pp. 897-8.