Integrating Small Satellite Communication in an Autonomous Vehicle Network: A Case
for Oceanography
André G. C. Guerraa,∗, António Sérgio Ferreirab, Maria Costab, Diego Nodar-Lópezc, Fernando Aguado Ageletc
aDepartamento de Física e Astronomia, Centro de Física do Porto, Faculdade de Ciências, Universidade do Porto, Portugal
bLaboratório de Sistemas e Tecnologia Subaquática, Faculdade de Engenharia, Universidade do Porto, Portugal
cEscola de Enxeñaría de Telecomunicación, Universidade de Vigo, España
Abstract
Small satellites and autonomous vehicles have greatly evolved in the last few decades. Hundreds of small satellites have been
launched with increasing functionalities, in the last few years. Likewise, numerous autonomous vehicles have been built, with
decreasing costs and form-factor payloads. Here we focus on combining these two multifaceted assets in an incremental way, with
an ultimate goal of alleviating the logistical expenses in remote oceanographic operations. The ﬁrst goal is to create a highly reliable
and constantly available communication link for a network of autonomous vehicles, taking advantage of the small satellite lower
cost, with respect to conventional spacecraft, and its higher ﬂexibility. We have developed a test platform as a proving ground for
this network, by integrating a satellite software deﬁned radio on an unmanned air vehicle, creating a system of systems, and several
tests have been run successfully, over land. As soon as the satellite is fully operational, we will start to move towards a cooperative
network of autonomous vehicles and small satellites, with application in maritime operations, both in-situ and remote sensing.
Keywords: Small Satellites, Autonomous Vehicles, Satellite Communication, System of Systems, Maritime Operations, Field Trials
1. Introduction
Oceans are a fundamental piece of the Earth ecosystem, not
only because they cover more than 70% of the Earth surface, but
also by playing a central role in the world climate. Therefore,
performing measurements of all its features, with both large
temporal and spatial resolution, is an important task for several
disciplines. Besides scientiﬁc objectives, there are also eco-
nomic and security issues, which most coastal countries have
been trying to tackle for several years. This has been mainly
achieved through the use of conventional ships or static assets,
which currently allow for several in situ methods of measuring
ocean features. Albeit their small scales, the measurements per-
formed are very accurate and can even be used to calibrate Earth
observation satellites.
In the last few years, autonomous vehicles, either underwa-
ter, surface or aerial, increased the capabilities of traditional as-
sets, by surveying larger areas in less time and at a smaller cost.
The use of autonomous systems provides numerous unparalleled
advantages to typical, human-centred, approaches to problem
solving when dealing with operational scenarios such as surveil-
lance [1], search and rescue [2], oceanographic and/or atmo-
spheric studies [3, 4]. Advances in autonomous vehicles are in a
state of rapid evolution not only due to the lowering of hardware
costs, which impact directly the feasibility of more ambitious
∗Corresponding author
Email addresses: aguerra@fc.up.pt (André G. C. Guerra),
asbf@lsts.pt (António Sérgio Ferreira), mariacosta@lsts.pt (Maria
Costa), diego.nodar@space.uvigo.es (Diego Nodar-López),
faguado@tsc.uvigo.es (Fernando Aguado Agelet)
endeavours, but also due to the increase in quantity and quality
of open-source alternatives to regular commercial autopilot and
payload solutions. These variables have set the stage for an ever
increasing plethora of applications for autonomous systems not
just centred on a single vehicle paradigm but more inline with
a multiple system approach. Consequently, networked vehicles
have been a topic of great interest due to the extended capabili-
ties which can be extracted for problem solving purposes [5].
Multi-vehicle operational setups have been spearheaded by
the LSTS (Laboratório de Sistemas e Tecnologia Subaquática)
from the University of Porto for quite sometime. Several devel-
opments have culminated in a robust software toolchain and in
low-cost vehicle solutions, whose discussion will be further ex-
panded in section 2. Moreover, all integration developments are
regularly tried and tested in large scale multiple vehicle deploy-
ments [6]. However, these large scale multiple deployments
lead to an increased level of diﬃculty in terms of guaranteed
interoperability in teams of heterogeneous vehicles [7, 8].
The challenge of implementing network interoperability is
of particular interest since unmanned assets can be seen simulta-
neously middle and end nodes in a multi-hop network. Further-
more, there is always a limitation in terms of range and band-
width of communication. Therefore, there has been an increas-
ing tendency of providing redundancy for the networked system
by implementing diﬀerent simultaneous communication chan-
nels in each asset [9]. While allowing to overcome some lim-
itations of each individual communication channel, this added
redundancy creates, at the same time, a more robust commu-
nication backbone for the underlying vehicle network. In this
regard, and specially when dealing with remote and/or spatially
Preprint submitted to Acta Astronautica https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actaastro.2018.01.022
April 18, 2018
arXiv:1710.10977v2  [cs.NI]  17 Apr 2018

--- PAGE BREAK ---

large covering operations, a de facto communication element
of a multi-channel backbone is the satellite link. Providing a
global and reliable means of communication, while empower-
ing local gateways, or replacing them all together if needed,
has long caught the attention of groups working in remote loca-
tions, hence positioning satellite communication as a paramount
player in robust networking in multi-vehicle scenarios.
Nowadays the most well know satellite communication sys-
tems are INMARSAT, Iridium, and Argos, for the particular
case of maritime applications. Some of these systems have a
large cost not only for the user to have access to them, but also
for the provider to set up and maintain them. Their characteris-
tics, both in terms of platforms used as well as user terminals,
are examined in section 3.
In the last two decades, cheaper spacecraft, which use com-
mercial oﬀ-the-shelf (COTS) components, have been growing
in number, capabilities and possible applications, the so-called
small satellites [10]. These spacecraft, classiﬁed as micro (<
100kg), nano (< 10kg) and pico (< 1kg) satellites, have among
other advantages an inherent cost reduction, although still fol-
lowing industry standards. Therefore, a constellation can be, in
principle, constructed at a lower price, assuring thus a continu-
ous cover of some sites or even the globe. Nevertheless, with the
known limitations of small satellites, for instance, the limited
power generation capability, they cannot be used for all kinds
of communication systems. An example of a small communica-
tion satellite system, created initially to support small scientiﬁc
and humanitarian operations, is the HumSat system (discussed
in section 4). This system is already on the second version,
where two way communication is one of the most important
new features.
Our main goal is thus to have an integrated operational sce-
nario with autonomous vehicles and small satellites linked and
working together. An overview of this scenario can be found in
section 5.
Firstly, this choice would free us from expensive current
satellite communication while, at the same time, maintaining the
satellite link as an integral part of the communication backbone.
Secondly, by equipping the spacecraft with other payloads, it
would expand the satellite’s operational portfolio, making it part
of the remote observation system, and helping the autonomous
vehicles navigate the monitored area, and ultimately to be “at
the right place at the right time”.
The ﬁrst step to accomplish our goal, is to have the au-
tonomous vehicles and small satellites talking to each other. To
this end, we integrated a HumSat software deﬁned radio (SDR)
on an unnamed air vehicle (UAV). Several bench tests were
carried out, to make sure everything was working as intended,
together with some ﬁeld trials. The work developed by LSTS
and the University of Vigo (UVigo), and the obtained results,
are described in section 6.
By using a SDR, and in particular the HumSat SDR, we have
a system that can be reconﬁgured as required. For example, any
vehicle equipped with the SDR can act as a storage node, if for
some reason the satellite is not available, forwarding the data
when a link to the ground station or the satellite is available.
Therefore, this ﬂexibility allows to create a system of systems.
2. LSTS Networked Systems
Currently the LSTS is composed of a multi-disciplinary re-
search team, including faculty members and students, with Elec-
trical, Computer, and Mechanical Engineering and Computer
Science backgrounds. Vehicles in the LSTS ﬂeet are engineered
for networked operations, and use modular hardware and soft-
ware components to facilitate development, maintenance, and
operations. The LSTS open source software toolchain allows
the operators at the LSTS control stations to command and con-
trol all types of vehicles in an uniform manner.
2.1. Software toolchain
The LSTS toolchain1, represented in Figure 1, is an open-
source software suite for mixed-initiative control (humans in
the planning and control loops) [11] of unmanned ocean and
air vehicles operating in communication challenging environ-
ments with support for Disruptive Tolerant Networking (DTN)
protocols [12]. The unique features of the toolchain are built
on experience with the coordinated operation of heterogeneous
vehicles [9].
Figure 1: Visual representation of the LSTS toolchain layers.
Ripples is a communication hub for data dissemination and
situation awareness. It serves as a web entry point for storing
situational awareness information like asset positions, mission
speciﬁcations and collected data. Ripples is used to collect data
1The open source software can be found at https://github.com/LSTS.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

from diﬀerent sources and to maintain a global situation aware-
ness. All data being sent and received from remote devices
is stored in Ripples, enabling coordination among geographi-
cally distributed teams, even in communication restricted envi-
ronments.
Neptus is a distributed command and control infrastructure
for the operation of all types of unmanned vehicles. It supports
the diﬀerent phases of a typical mission life cycle: planning, sim-
ulation, execution and post-mission analysis. It can be adapted
by operators to ﬁt mission-speciﬁc requirements and extended
by developers through a comprehensive plug-in framework.
IMC (Inter-Module Communication) protocol is a message
oriented protocol designed and implemented to build intercon-
nected systems of vehicles, sensors and human operators. These
are thus able to pursue common goals cooperatively by exchang-
ing real-time information about the environment and updated
objectives. IMC abstracts hardware and communication het-
erogeneity by providing a shared set of messages that can be
serialized and transferred over diﬀerent means.
DUNE (Uniﬁed Navigational Environment) is an on-board
software running on the vehicles. It is responsible not only for
every interaction with sensors, payload and actuators, but also
for communication, navigation, control, manoeuvring, plan exe-
cution and vehicle supervision. It is written to be independent
of CPU architecture, as well as operating system.
2.2. Autonomous vehicle system
Although there are various vehicles available at the LSTS,
we opted to start integrating smaller UAVs as our test platform.
This was done due to the simplicity of the hardware integration,
and the fact that the communication links on these vehicles are
very straightforward in their conﬁgurations.
The UAV currently used by LSTS is the X8 Skywalker delta
wing. It is a COTS vehicle, modiﬁed at the LSTS, which has
been used within various types of operational scenarios in pre-
vious projects.
The glider shape and size allows for a logistically light op-
eration setup with a short preparation time (about 20 minutes
for the ﬁrst ﬂight, where the UAV is mounted and all consoles
turned on, and around 5 minutes for subsequent ﬂights). Fur-
thermore, the vehicle possesses a wide oval internal area, which
allows for easy accommodation of diﬀerent kinds of payload.
This proved important for the physical integration process of the
HumSat system, due to its prototype nature. It is thus a vehicle
perfected for low altitude reconnaissance scenarios, with live
video feed, and for remote sensor scenarios.
As presented in Table 1, the main construction material of
the X8 is Expanded PolyOleﬁn (EPO) foam. The X8 has no
documented turbulence restrictions and no minimum visibility
conditions for operation. Moreover, it has no strict outside air
temperature limitations, except for the ones we have determined
at the LSTS (0 ◦C and 40 ◦C). Regarding any in-ﬂight icing
issues, the LSTS X8 does not operate in any environment that
would allow such a scenario.
Table 1: X8 Vehicle Speciﬁcations.
Parameter
Value
Model Designation
X8 Skywalker
Design
Fixed wing delta wing
Material
EPO Foam
Motor Type
Electric
Fuel/Energy
LiPo battery
Length
0.80 m
Wingspan
2.12 m
Body Diameter
Oval (from 0.15 m to 0.30 m)
Brakes
None
Hydraulic System
None
Parachute
None
Weight Empty
1.2 kg
Mean Take-OﬀWeight
4.3 kg
Indicated Air Speed (Min|Cruise|Max)
15 | 18 | 23 (m/s)
Wind Tolerance (Head|Cross|Gust)
17 | 15 | 19 (m/s)
Maximum Endurance
50 min
Maximum Range
20 000 m
Maximum Altitude
350 m
Maximum rate of climb
2 m/s
Maximum rate of descent
3 m/s
Maximum bank angle
30 deg
Turn radius | Turn rate limits
31 m | 32 deg/s
3. Commercial satellite communication systems
Most satellite communication systems are designed for large
volumes of data, i.e. the user has at his disposal video, voice and
data communication. Nevertheless, there are systems designed
speciﬁcally for performing primarily data collection. The objec-
tive for these systems is to have multiple small ground terminals,
transmitting small amounts of information, which are then col-
lected by satellites passing above, and downlinked afterwards to
a ground station.
3.1. INMARSAT
The ﬁrst dedicated maritime satellite communication ser-
vice was INMARSAT. The system is arranged in a four-ocean-
region conﬁguration [13], with a total of twelve operational
satellites [14]. The new network of spacecraft, called Global Ex-
press, is composed of three satellites plus a spare one at a Geosta-
tionary orbit (GEO), i.e. at an altitude of about 35 800 km [15].
Each satellite has a mass at launch of about 6 100 kg and mea-
sures 6.98 m × 33.8 m, when deployed. Five solar panels are
used to generate over 13 kW, after 15 years in orbit, and a Xenon
ion propulsion maintains the satellite orbit. There are several
ground stations, distributed over the globe, routing all data re-
ceived to each customer over the internet.
The customer has several diﬀerent equipments available to
use the system, including handheld satellite phones (e.g. the Isat-
Phone 2) or satellite radios (e.g. the Fleet One Handset) [15].
These radios, attached to ﬁxed antennas weighting 2.5 kg and
measuring 27.5 cm × 22.1 cm, can provide up to 100 kbits/s,
consuming around 100 W [16]. Smaller options, e.g. the IsatM2M
service, has modems measuring just 12.6 cm × 12.6 cm × 4.9 cm
(for powered vehicles) or 43.2 cm × 14.7 cm × 2.5 cm (for a mo-
dem equipped with batteries) [17]. For the latter, the weights
goes up to 1.3 kg, including batteries. Antennas for these modems

--- PAGE BREAK ---

measure 12.6 cm × 9.3 cm × 7.4 cm. Since the satellites are at a
high orbit, both terminals need more power to send data. There-
fore, the consumption can go up to 9 W when transmitting.
3.2. Iridium
One of the most well-known satellite communication ser-
vices is Iridium. The system uses 66 satellites (without count-
ing spares) distributed by 11 orbital planes [13]. Unlike any
other communication system, these satellites are cable of chang-
ing messages between them, with each satellite linked to four
others [18].
Iridium is build of low Earth orbit (LEO) satellites, at an alti-
tude of approximately 780 km. The new spacecraft, the Iridium
NEXT, have life spans closer to 12.5 years [19], and are smaller
(2.4 m × 9.4 m when deployed), lighter (with a mass of 860 kg),
and require less power to operate (2.2 kW), when compared to
INMARSAT [19].
The user terminals are commercialised by other companies
and are usually small, with omnidirectional antennas and lim-
ited power available. Nowadays, one of the top of the line sys-
tems includes a broadband connection and three independent
voice lines, using an equipment with 1.35 kg and a 12.5 kg an-
tenna [20]. This system claims to have data transfer rates of
up to 134 kbits/s, consuming up to 31 W during data transmis-
sion. There are also small transceivers capable of transmitting
short burst data, for instance, for data telemetry (with less than
340 bytes) [20]. Data rates for these can reach 2.4 kbits/s [20].
Another commercial example is the RockBlock communication
equipment, from Rock Seven, which weights 0.076 kg, mea-
sures 7.6 cm × 5.2 cm × 1.9 cm [21], and the transceiver con-
sumes less than 1 W for transmitting [20].
The companies that sell the terminals lease the access to the
system and charge for each voice or data call (i.e. duration or
volume of data exchanged). For example, Rock Seven nowa-
days charges $10 /month so a transceiver can connect to the
system, and about $0.14 /message (each message is composed
of a maximum of 50 bytes) [22]. CLS Group charges around
1 e/kbytes of data transmitted, for the large bandwidth real-time
system [23]. Others charge $0.75 /minute to $1.50 /minute, for
outgoing calls, and several dollars per minute for incoming ones.
3.3. Argos
Argos is operated and managed by the CLS Group, which
charges about 4 e/day, with a maximum of 63 e/month [23].
Version 2 of the system oﬀers global coverage and Doppler lo-
cation capability, with terminals transmitting messages at a reg-
ular interval, without a downlink acknowledgement. With the
new version (Argos 3) two way communication is implemented,
and the terminals, now called Platform Messaging Transceivers,
only send messages when a satellite is in view [24].
The lighter Argos 3 equipment available (mass of 0.08 kg),
is manufactured by Elta (exclusively for CLS), measures 1.8
cm × 4.3 cm × 10 cm and consumes up to 5 W [25]. A heavier
option is produced by Kenwood (2.5 cm × 6 cm × 8 cm with a
mass of 0.16 kg and a power consumption of also 5 W) [26]. All
transmitters use UHF to communicate, and have a structured
message composition (with maximum 31 bytes of user data per
message [23]). Average data rate for both transceivers is about
400 bits/s [23].
Argos does not have its own dedicated satellites. Instead,
it depends on other large spacecraft to function (e.g. MetOp,
4 087 kg, and NOAA 5th generation, 2 232 kg) [27]. All of these
satellites are sun synchronous (altitude of about 800 km) and,
although designed for other purposes, they are equipped with
Argos payloads, a receiver (16 kg) and a transmitter (8 kg), pro-
viding a data rate of up to 4.8 kbits/s [24]. For the orbit of
these satellites, and the transmitters used, this means that up
to 3.1 kbytes are upload each pass (in interactive mode with
downlink acknowledgement) [23]. Daily this means an aver-
age data transmitted of 10 kbytes, depending on the transceiver
latitude [23].
The ground segment is composed of three main stations,
which receive all user data from the satellites. Apart from those,
there are several regional ones, that perform data relay (i.e. re-
ceive data if the station and transmitter are under the same foot-
print).
4. A diﬀerent comms approach – The HumSat system
4.1. Introduction
Building upon the advantages of small satellites, a new com-
munication system started to be developed in 2011, the Hum-
Sat system. A project supported mainly by the UN oﬃce for
outer space aﬀairs (UNOOSA) and the European Space Agency
(ESA), was initiated as a cooperation between the University of
Vigo, the California Polytechnic State University, the National
Autonomous University of Mexico, and the Regional Center for
Education in Space Science and Technology in Latin America
and Caribbean Countries [28]. It is also supported by the Inter-
nation Astronautical Federation.
It is a smaller system than all previous ones, still under de-
velopment, but very similar to the Argos concept. Table 2 shows
a comparison of this system with the ones described above.
The initial aim was to provide a free non-guaranteed store
and forward data system to serve areas not covered by telecom-
munication services, for humanitarian purposes [29]. Another
objective was to have sensors in remote areas transmitting mes-
sages to users, without having to set up a communication net-
work [28].
The system is now moving slowly from a technological
demonstrator to commercial applications, the HumSat 2.0 [29].
The plan is not only to maximize the number of users, but to
include two-way communication and new added value services,
such as data relay between terminals, encrypted communication,
prioritization, reliable communications and group of terminals
management capabilities. Diﬀerent access schemes are being
devised, as well as error correction algorithms and ﬁxed and mo-
bile terminals support. All of them enabled by the deployment
of a constellation of small satellites.
All HumSat satellites have been controlled using the same
operation software and tools. UVigo built a ground station at
the university, with two redundant stations capable of receiving

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Table 2: Comparison between satellite communication services (data from Refs. [20, 22, 24, 23]).
System
Orbit Altitude [km]
Comm. Type
Transmitting Power†[W]
Data rate†[kbits/s]
Data Amount per Message†[bytes]
System of systems
INMARSAT
35 800 (GEO)
Voice
Data
6 400
Iridium
780 (LEO)
Voice
Data
Argos
800 (LEO)
Data
HumSat
600 (LEO)
Data
† Values shown are top limits.
∗Information not available.
four simultaneous polarisation signals [29]. Nevertheless, to
command and downlink data from these small satellites it is not
necessary a big antenna. Besides supporting the operation of the
two satellites described above, it was also used to communicate
with other small satellites.
4.2. User Segment
The transmitter of the HumSat system is called by UVigo as
the user terminal. There are two options available, either use an
automatic or autonomous platform, or to integrate the HumSat
transmitter directly on the user equipment. The ﬁrst is an almost
plug and play solution, which simply relays data coming from
the user sensors [29]. For the second terminal the user needs to
prepare both the hardware and software to link the transmitter to
its equipment. We focus here on this last option as it is smaller,
lighter and consumes less power.
This transmitter is a simple board with three modules, a ra-
dio frequency (RF) stage, a control stage, and a power stage, as
shown in Figure 2. The board shown weighs 30 g and measures
13 cm × 5.3 cm. The interface to connect to the board is similar
to an Arduino Shield. The RF connector, to link the terminal to
an antenna, is an U.FL connector.
Figure 2: HumSat transmitter photo with labels (from UVigo).
To power the board an unregulated line from 4.3 V and 17 V
has to be used, and the board regulates itself accordingly. The
board consumes in standby less than 0.14 W, and up to 3.2 W
when transmitting at 30 dBm. If just 27 dBm are used for trans-
mitting, it consumes 2.4 W.
The communication interface is performed over a universal
asynchronous receiver/transmitter (UART) serial bus, with a bit
rate of 9.6 kbits/s. The RF output signal has a frequency be-
tween 400 MHz and 470 MHz, and a maximum possible power
output of 30 dBm, both selected by the user. The signals have a
GMSK (Gaussian Minimum Shift Keying) modulation, with a
data rate of up to 1.2 kbits/s.
HumSat 2.0 terminals will have a similar electrical conﬁgu-
ration. However, the board is expected to be smaller and capable
of higher data rates. Furthermore, smart terminals are being de-
signed to be dynamically integrated with newer sensors [29].
4.3. Space Segment
Although up to now Argos and HumSat seam very similar,
one of the main diﬀerences is the spacecraft they use. HumSat
uses a constellation of small satellites, in particular CubeSats,
although only a few at a time have been launched yet.
The ﬁrst satellite, HumSat-D, was launched in 2013, and
was an adaptation of the previous UVigo small satellite, Xat-
cobeo (Figure 3). It was a CubeSat, with 10 cm × 10 cm × 10 cm,
and weighted 1 kg. Using solar cells distributed through most
faces, it produced around 3 W. This was suﬃcient to power the
satellite and its communication payload. This consisted in a sin-
gle electronics board and one turnstile omnidirectional antenna
(with four monopoles). No attitude control was even necessary
to operate the satellite. Launched from a Dnepr-1 rocket as a
secondary payload, its ﬁnal orbit altitude was 600 km, and was
operational for over a year [30].
Figure 3: Xatcobeo satellite (from ESA-UVigo/INTA)
With HumSat-D UVigo wanted a demonstrator and guide
for the remaining satellites of the system [29]. The next one
was called Serpens, and was built for the University of Brasilia
with the support of UVigo, funded by the Brazilian space agency.
This was a bigger CubeSat (10 cm × 10 cm × 30 cm and 3 kg).
The objective of this satellite was to test diﬀerent combinations
of the payload and user terminals for future implementations.
Additionally, this satellite included an enhanced payload which
was able to counteract external interferences in UHF band, de-
tected with the ﬁrst satellite.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

5. An Integrated System: Mission scenarios
The main driver for the developments presented here is to
enable multi-vehicle systems to operate in an integrated and
coordinated fashion, by providing them with a robust and stable
communication backbone with an ultimate goal of reducing cost
and complexity in remote maritime operations. We endeavour to
show that, through the use of new small satellite technology, the
underlying cost overhead of using satellite communication can
be signiﬁcantly reduced. At the same time, we can empower the
observation and data collection capabilities of the network, by
also having these satellites participate with their own on-board
payload.
A pristine example of an operational scenario is the Por-
tuguese continental shelf. To monitor and carry out surveillance
of its current 1.72 million km2 area, or the proposed extension
of 4 million km2 (Figure 4), with just conventional methods, rep-
resents a large investment, monetary and human. Therefore, a
robust autonomous network like the one described here is fun-
damental to support these tasks [31].
Looking at Figure 4, the mission scenario has various layers
of active communication links. These links range from short-
range (Wi-Fi/RF), through medium-range (GSM/4G), up to
satellite communication. Moreover, these links are not frozen
and can be re-arranged as assets are entering and leaving the op-
eration area. The plug-and-play modality is fundamental for the
viability of a system of systems, and a central reason why the
developed eﬀorts here were built upon a pre-existent software
tool-chain, devised to handle such operational setups.
Figure 4: Operational scenario of an integrated network of autonomous vehicles
and small satellites.
Although we plan to start with a single small satellite, a
constellation of spacecraft will serve the goal better. Since this
constellation will take time to build, the scalability of the net-
work can be initially probed through the use of various UAVs
which, provided with suﬃcient SDRs, can emulate the satellites.
Although the range and scope of the scenario will not be as far-
reaching as with satellites, a lot can be inferred regarding issues
of bandwidth and network capacity for the radios.
Even though the project used to fund part of this work is cen-
tred in a forest ﬁre project with UVigo [32], all developments
can be easily ported to oceanographic scenarios, since the net-
work created is agnostic to the type of data being streamed and
collected.
To facilitate system integration and testing, we began with
the LSTS X8 UAV, focusing on transmitting only the vehicle’s
position and velocity. Nevertheless, as the project evolves more
metadata will be sent through the satellite, since the communi-
cation protocol supports message segmentation and reassembly,
to handle information too extensive for a single burst. The X8
already has Wi-Fi and GSM communication, and we can thus
use these for redundancy during the SDR tests.
6. System integration and test
6.1. Hardware
Hardware integration of the HumSat system implies adding
the SDR board, and an UHF antenna, to the UAV payload. For
the LSTS’s X8 delta wing this is quite straightforward, consid-
ering both its main CPU and the SDR board have a 3V3 TTL
(Transistor–Transistor Logic) serial communication. Figure 5
depicts where the SDR is placed within the X8 avionics.
Figure 5: X8 Avionics – Block Diagram.
For selecting the antenna, and placing it on the vehicle, the
main concern is to match the radiation pattern to our needs.
In particular, the UAV is required to communicate both with a
satellite and ground assets, as discussed in section 5. Therefore,
the selected antenna is a UHF Dipole 433 MHz [33], and is
installed on the nose of the vehicle (see Figure 9).
6.2. Software
All software developments made to integrate the SDR sys-
tem were done on top of the software toolchain developed at the
LSTS, previously described in section 2. A driver task, named
SatComms, collects and parses messages, determines when the
satellite is in view of the vehicle (and messages can be transmit-
ted), and manages the interaction with the HumSat transmitter
(using an adaptation of UVigo’s libraries) [34].
SatComms falls within the Transports scope (communication
and logging) on DUNE’s code organization. During operations
the user has full control of the task, being able to change sev-
eral parameters related to radio conﬁgurations, satellite orbital
information (period, communication window and last passage),

--- PAGE BREAK ---

if data is to be transmitted whenever possible, and which type
of data.
Bandwidth constraints of the satellite communication sys-
tem are a major concern, with the current version limited to
32 bytes messages. This is circumvented by fragmenting data
into smaller parts and then reassembling them back to its orig-
inal state. The two main reasons for this solution are the fact
that it was already implemented within the LSTS toolchain, and
because it is a message type independent solution.
6.3. Tests and Results
To test and validate the SDR hardware and software integra-
tion, since the real satellite is still to be deployed (2018), UVigo
provided a satellite simulator. This simulator is able to run the
same software that will go on-board the future satellite and thus
mimics its behaviour. The test set was divided in three stages:
workbench tests, communication dry-run and ﬁnally ﬁeld trials.
6.3.1. Workbench Tests
A closed-loop setup was devised to verify every step of the
implementation. It is composed by an exact replica of the UAV
avionics (an X8 Testbed), the HumSat SDR transmitter and a
dummy antenna, a satellite simulator (provided by UVigo for
testing purposes) and a laptop running Neptus (a Neptus Work-
station). Part of this setup is shown in ﬁgure 6.
Dummy
Antenna
X8 Testbed
Satellite
Simulator
Figure 6: X8 avionics Testbed with HumSat transmitter connected and UVigo
satellite simulator.
This Hardware-in-the-Loop (HITL) setup is used to validate
the SatComms task behaviour in a simulated environment, in
particular the data fragmentation, transmission and reconstruc-
tion outcome. At this stage, all systems are connected in the
same network and the simulator is conﬁgured to send the incom-
ing data to the Neptus Workstation (IP and Port). The Neptus
Workstation received all message fragments and was able to re-
construct the data. A few changes were necessary on Neptus
to handle repeated message fragments correctly, since the SDR
forwards, for redundancy, four times each message.
6.3.2. Communication Dry-Run
Following the software developments validation, we setup a
test to emulate a real operational scenario. This requires, apart
from the equipment used before, two communication gateways2.
2The LSTS Manta Communication Gateways is a portable communication
hub, allowing multiple communication channels to be active at the same time.
Both gateways are capable of providing a 3G connection, each
with a diﬀerent external IP, thus creating isolated networks. The
LSTS server needs to be active as it will serve as a data router.
In this testing setup, shown in ﬁgure 7, the simulator is con-
nected to one communication gateway (gateway A), whilst the
Testbed (linked to the SDR) and the Neptus Workstation (which
will play the part of a remote DPC, Deferred Procedure Call)
are connected to another gateway (gateway B). We placed the
Testbed (plus SDR) and the Neptus Workstation on the same
network only for logistical convenience, since we also need to
have a local workstation to command the Testbed.
Gateway A
(a) Network A
Gateway B
(b) Network B
Figure 7: Communication Dry-Run scenario test setup.
The satellite simulator is conﬁgured to send the incoming
data to the LSTS server (which is in the laboratory connected to
the Internet), using gateway A. In turn, the server routes the data
received from the IP of gateway A to the IP of gateway B, which
delivers the incoming server traﬃc to the Neptus Workstation.
A schematic of the links is depicted in ﬁgure 8. The Neptus
Workstation can distinguish between the traﬃc received from
the UAV and the one coming from the satellite. In fact, the only
way the Neptus Workstation can receive the data that is being
sent with the SDR is through the routing communication done
by the LSTS server
A test sequence was carried out to verify everything was
working as expected. The tests made, the desired outcome and
the results are enumerated, in sequence, in table 3.
6.3.3. Field Trials
After testing and evaluating the SDR integration develop-
ments in the workbench, the next step was to conﬁrm the results
at the airﬁeld. We installed the HumSat transmitter in the vehi-
cle’s belly (vertically, for space optimization purposes) and the
UHF antenna on the nose (opposite side to Pitot tube), as shown
in ﬁgure 9.
The operational setup is identical to the “Communication
Dry-Run” scenario. The only diﬀerence is the use of the real

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Table 3: Communication Dry-Run validation tests.
Test
Description
Expected Outcome
Results
Conﬁgure network interface in Simulator
Manual conﬁguration of eth0
Connection established between gateway and simulator
Conﬁgure Simulator NeptusConnections
Conﬁgure IP and port values
Connection established with LSTS server
Connect communication gateways to
internet
Enable “Mobile Internet” in both gateways and
give external IPs to POC at LSTS
Mobile Internet successfully established and external IP
attributed
Route incoming communication [client]
Add iptable rule to route incoming data from
LSTS server to Neptus workstations
Iptable rule successfully saved
Route incoming communication [server]
Conﬁgure LSTS server ﬁrewall to route incoming
simulator data to ﬁeld operation network
Connection established between LSTS server and Neptus
Workstation
Testbed power up
Power up!
Wait for system in “SERVICE” and SatComms task active
Start Simulator
Power up and run script “LSTS”
Simulator ready to receive data
Conﬁgure Satellite
Enable satellite and conﬁgure last passage
parameter
Set parameter and warns about sent option state
Start transmission!
Enable send option
Wait for satellite to appear and starts sending data
Check transmission
Check if dune is transmitting OK
HumSat terminal conﬁrms transmission OK
Check Simulator reception
Check if simulator is receiving packets
Simulator receiving packets
Check Neptus reception
Check if Neptus is receiving data
Neptus shows incoming MessageParts
Check message reconstruction in Neptus
Check if data received is being correctly
reconstructed
Neptus shows data reconstructed correctly
† Only on second attempt. On the ﬁrst one, LSTS server was routing data to a port not available, causing the script to crash.
Figure 8: Communication Dry-Run scenario test setup – Block Diagram.
UHF Antenna
Figure 9: X8 with SDR and UHF antenna installed.
X8 instead of the X8 Testbed. Figure 10 presents the setup used
during the ﬁeld trials, and Table 4 displays the scripted ﬁeld
mission step-by-step, with the obtained results during the ﬁeld
trials.
Satellite
Simulator
Gateway A
(a) Network A
Gateway B
X8 + SDR
Netpus
Workstation
(b) Network B
Figure 10: Field trials operational setup.
During the ﬂight tests we were able to gauge that, with the
current HumSat conﬁguration, just one satellite, and a communi-
cation window of about 5 minutes, approximately 45 kilobytes
would be sent from the vehicle to the satellite. In a multi-vehicle
scenario, even with a single spacecraft, larger streams of infor-
mation can be shared among the vehicles, which can then sched-
ule their data transmission, so that a large data packet (e.g. an
image, an environmental log or some navigational data) can be
transmitted and reconstructed on the command and control sta-
tion. The ﬁeld trials were carried out on April 2017, with the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Table 4: Field mission script.
Op. Phase
Test
Description
Expected Outcome
Results
Conﬁgure network interface in
Simulator
Manual conﬁguration of eth0
Connection established between gateway and simulator
Setup
Conﬁgure Simulator
NeptusConnections
Conﬁgure IP and port values
Connection established with LSTS server
Connect communication gateways to
internet
Enable “Mobile Internet” in both gateways and
give external IPs to POC at LSTS.
Mobile Internet successfully established and external IP
attributed.
Route incoming communication
[client]
Add iptable rule to route incoming data from
LSTS server to Neptus workstation
Iptable rule successfully saved.
Route incoming communication
[server]
Conﬁgure LSTS server ﬁrewall to route incoming
simulator data to ﬁeld operation network
Connection established between LSTS server and
Neptus Workstation
Pre-ﬂight
Power up UAV
Power up UAV and check all systems
Everything working as expected
Check SDR communication
Check if Satcomms is working properly
Satcomms reports status active
Check SDR range
Do SDR + UHF antenna range test on the ground
Receive data successfully when UAV is away (as far as
possible)
UAV takeoﬀ
Catapult launch
UAV in air and OK
Flight
Survey plan upload
Make survey plan above desire location and
upload it to vehicle
Vehicle synchronizes plan successfully
Conﬁgure Satellite
Enable satellite and conﬁgure last passage
parameter
Set parameter and warns about sent option state
Start transmission!
Enable send option
Wait for satellite to appear and starts sending data
Survey Plan Execution
Start plan previously uploaded
Plan execution starts
Check transmission
Check if dune is transmitting OK
HumSat terminal conﬁrms transmission OK
Check Simulator reception
Check if simulator is receiving packets
Simulator receiving packets
Check Neptus reception
Check if Neptus is receiving data
Neptus shows incoming MessageParts
Check message reconstruction in
Neptus
Check if data received is being correctly
reconstructed
Neptus shows data reconstructed correctly
Waits for end of transmission
Loiter away from plan location after survey
completed while communication window is open.
Loiter while transmitting.
UAV Land
UAV retrieval
UAV landing safely!
† On the ﬁrst ﬂight there were some problems receiving all MessageParts, since the UAV was forced to ﬂy away from the simulator area due to very strong winds. On the second trial the
ﬂight occur at the determined area, and all data was received and reconstructed.
next steps already envisioned for mid 2018, when we expect to
have a real satellite in operation.
7. Conclusions
In this work we have described the LSTS vehicle system
as well as UVigo’s SDR board in detail. For the LSTS, the
toolchain as well as the vehicles have been deployed around the
world, with many hours of accumulated operations. Although
the HumSat system from UVigo is more recent, it has been
validated with the launch of two small satellites, and several
ground terminals deployed in places such as Antarctica, South
and North America, and Europe.
Additionally, we characterised some of the current commer-
cial satellite communication systems. Even though there are
several options available, we focus on the ones that could be
representative of the diﬀerent options for sea operational scenar-
ios. Moreover, we discussed a large bandwidth and real time
system, INMARSAT, one with limited bandwidth and gaps in
the communication, Argos, and a mixed system that can oﬀer
both options and does not require a large transmitting power,
Iridium. These solutions depend on the user’s objectives, and
have a wide range of prices.
Finally, we have presented the eﬀorts of integrating the Hum-
Sat SDR system on-board of a small, low cost, UAV. The devel-
opment team created additional software for the LSTS toolchain,
which allows the use of the SDR as a viable communication
channel, in spite of the current limitations to the amount of data
which can be streamed through this channel. Moreover, a prelim-
inary analysis of the bandwidth issues with the SDR technology
was assessed, and important conclusions for the next version of
the radio prototype were drawn. These will inﬂuence the next
prototype iteration of the SRD system.
8. Future Work
The modiﬁcations to the current proposed solution deal with
both hardware and software components. One of the main is-
sues, already being addressed, is the possibility of upgrading the
HumSat SDR to allow centralised full-duplex communication,
since the current prototype only has one-way. This would en-
able each vehicle to receive as well as transmit data, increasing
the robustness of the communication network, without using
two SDRs. It would also simplify communication logistics and
accommodation problems in small UAVs. Another issue, is the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

number of messages that have to be sent to the satellite to trans-
mit a simple variable as the vehicle’s estimated state. Since the
main reason, apart from the HumSat 32 bytes data length, is the
overhead created by the IMC communication protocol, steps are
being taken to employ a minimalistic version of this protocol for
the satellite channel. With this approach, less messages would
have to be transmitted for each package of data, maximising
thus successful variable reconstruction on the Neptus Worksta-
tion (i.e. the UAV ground station). All of these solutions will be
tested in the next batch of ﬁeld ﬂight tests.
Although a fully ﬂedged test will be diﬃcult without a com-
plete satellite constellation in place, the scalability of the pro-
posed solution can still be inferred by the use of multiple UAVs
in the operation area as smaller relay nodes. These will help
identifying issues about the network before having the logisti-
cal costs associated with the spacecraft launches while, at the
same time, allow for evaluating the synergies of the SDR tech-
nology with the remaining communication links available to the
autonomous vehicle teams.
The reality of creating a fully multimedia satellite service
would require a considerable initial investment, even taking into
account the reduced cost of small satellites when compared with
conventional commercial ones. It would have to take into ac-
count not only the costs of developing and building the nec-
essary number of spacecraft, but also to cope with the logis-
tics involved in launching all small satellites, and making sure
that they reached their correct positions. Nonetheless, a small
satellite constellation, providing just low speed data connection
will, at least in principle, have a smaller cost. Moreover, the
overall success of the small satellites approach, to keep up with
the large communication spacecraft, is correlated with speciﬁc
pieces of technology which are key for future missions. Exam-
ples of these include new and miniaturised high gain antennae,
improved software deﬁned radios, high eﬃcient ampliﬁers, and
better orbit and attitude control.
Acknowledgements
The work of André Guerra is supported by the Fundação
para a Ciência e a Tecnologia (Portuguese Agency for Research)
fellowship PD/BD/113536/2015. André Guerra would also like
to thank his PhD supervisor, Orfeu Bertolami, for several discus-
sions and suggestions on the subject of this paper, and for review-
ing it. The work of Maria Costa and Sérgio Ferreira was partially
supported by Marinfo (NORTE-01-0145-FEDER-000031) and
STRIDE (NORTE-01-0145-FEDER-000033). The work of Diego
Nodar and Fernando Aguado was partially supported by the
Spanish Ministry of Economy, Industry and Competitiveness un-
der projects HumSat 2.0 (ESP2013-47935-C4-1-R) and IMONss
(ESP2016-79184-R). The work of Maria Costa, Sérgio Ferreira,
Diego Nodar and Fernando Aguado was partially supported by
Interreg Sudoe programme under grant number SOE1/P4/E0437
(Fire-RS project). The authors would like to thank all the sup-
port from the people in the Laboratório de Sistemas e Tec-
nologia Subaquática (LSTS) and Centro Gallego de Innovación
Aerospacial (CINAE).
References
[1] G. Zhou, S. Reichle, UAV-based multi-sensor data fusion processing,
International Journal of Image and Data Fusion 1 (3) (2010) 283–291.
doi:10.1080/19479832.2010.497343.
[2] E. Bitton, K. Goldberg, Hydra: A framework and algorithms for mixed-
initiative UAV-assisted search and rescue, in: 2008 IEEE International
Conference on Automation Science and Engineering, IEEE, 2008, pp.
61–66. doi:10.1109/COASE.2008.4626527.
[3] P. McGuillivary, J. B. Sousa, R. Martins, Connecting the dots. Network-
ing maritime ﬂeets of autonomous systems for science and surveillance,
Marine Technology Reporter (2012) 32–38.
[4] J. Fortuna, F. Ferreira, R. Gomes, A. S. Ferreira, J. B. Sousa, Using low
cost open source UAVs for marine wild life monitoring - Field Report,
IFAC Proceedings Volumes 46 (30) (2013) 291–295.
doi:10.3182/
20131120-3-FR-4045.00055.
[5] J. Eckert, D. Eckhoft, R. German, Flying Ad-Hoc Network communica-
tion for detecting thermals: Feasibility and insights, in: Third International
Conference on Innovative Computing Technology (INTECH 2013), IEEE,
2013, pp. 333–338. doi:10.1109/INTECH.2013.6653654.
[6] J. B. Sousa, J. Pereira, J. Pinto, P. C. Lourenfo, J. M. Galocha, J. Fontes,
M. Silva, K. Rajan, T. A. Johansson, J. Alves, A. Munafò, K. Pelekanakis,
R. Petroccia, M. Carreiro Silva, M. Incze, Rapid Environmental Picture At-
lantic exercise 2015: A ﬁeld report, in: OCEANS 2016 MTS/IEEE Mon-
terey, IEEE, 2016, pp. 1–6. doi:10.1109/OCEANS.2016.7761496.
URL http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7761496/
[7] B. Bagdatli, K. Griendling, D. Kalpakchian, E. Jones, S. Ussery, J. Ball,
J. Kallman, D. Mavris, A method for examining the impact of interoper-
ability on mission performance in a system-of-systems, in: 2010 IEEE
Aerospace Conference, IEEE, 2010, pp. 1–15.
doi:10.1109/AERO.
2010.5446884.
[8] C. Fuchs, A. S. Ferreira, J. B. Sousa, G. Gonçalves, Adaptive Con-
soles for Supervisory Control of Multiple Unmanned Aerial Vehicles,
in: M. Kurosu (Ed.), Human-Computer Interaction. Interaction Modal-
ities and Techniques, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2013, pp. 678–687.
doi:10.1007/978-3-642-39330-3_73.
[9] A. S. Ferreira, J. Pinto, P. S. Dias, J. B. Sousa, The LSTS software
toolchain for persistent maritime operations applied through vehicular ad-
hoc networks, in: 2017 International Conference on Unmanned Aircraft
Systems (ICUAS), IEEE, 2017, pp. 609–616.
doi:10.1109/ICUAS.
2017.7991471.
[10] A. G. C. Guerra, F. Francisco, J. Villate, F. Aguado Agelet, O. Bertolami,
K. Rajan, On small satellites for oceanography: A survey, Acta Astro-
nautica 127 (2016) 404–423. doi:10.1016/j.actaastro.2016.06.
007.
[11] J. Pinto, P. S. Dias, R. Martins, J. Fortuna, E. Marques, J. B. Sousa,
The LSTS toolchain for networked vehicle systems, in: OCEANS 2013
MTS/IEEE Bergen: The Challenges of the Northern Dimension, IEEE,
2013, pp. 1–9. doi:10.1109/OCEANS-Bergen.2013.6608148.
[12] D. Merani, A. Berni, J. Potter, R. Martins, An Underwater Convergence
Layer for Disruption Tolerant Networking, in: 2011 Baltic Congress on
Future Internet and Communications, IEEE, 2011, pp. 103–108. doi:
10.1109/BCFIC-RIGA.2011.5733227.
[13] B. G. Evans (Ed.), Satellite Communication Systems, IET, The Institution
of Engineering and Technology, Michael Faraday House, Six Hills Way,
Stevenage SG1 2AY, UK, 1999. doi:10.1049/PBTE038E.
[14] P. Chini, G. Giambene, S. Kota, A survey on mobile satellite systems,
International Journal of Satellite Communications and Networking (2009)
29– –57doi:10.1002/sat.941.
[15] Inmarsat plc., inmarsat, visited June 15, 2017 (2013).
URL www.inmarsat.com
[16] Inmarsat plc., Fleet One - INMARSAT terminal speciﬁcation (2014).
[17] Orbcomm, ORBCOMM, visited June 17, 2017 (2017).
URL www.orbcomm.com
[18] R. Hobby, An introduction to the Iridium, in: IEE Colloquium on Commu-
nication Opportunities Oﬀered by Advanced Satellite Systems, Vol. 1998,
IEE, London, UK, 1998, pp. 1–1. doi:10.1049/ic:19980875.
[19] Orbital ATK, Iridium NEXT - Fact Sheet, retrieved June 20, 2017 (2015).
https://www.orbitalatk.com/space-systems/
commercial-satellites/communications-satellites/docs/
FS002{_}11{_}OA{_}3862IridiumNEXT.pdf
[20] CLS America, Iridium Services & Hardware - 2017 Catalog (2016).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

[21] Rock Seven Mobile Services Ltd, RockBLOCK v2 - Developer Guide
(2016).
[22] Rock Seven Mobile Services Ltd, Rock Seven, visited June 20, 2017
(2014).
URL www.rock7mobile.com
[23] B. Yann, CLS America, Personal communication (2017).
[24] CLS America, Argos-3 – The New Generation, Tech. rep. (2011).
[25] Elta, Terminals and Beacons – PMT Argos 3 (2017).
[26] CLS America, Argos-3 PMT-K – Platform messaging transceiver (2009).
[27] European Space Agency, Satellite Missions Directory - Earth Observation
Missions - eoPortal, visited June 20, 2017 (2017).
URL https://directory.eoportal.org
[28] A. Castro, R. Walker, F. Emma, F. Aguado Agelet, R. Tubio, W. Balogh,
Hands-on experience: The HumSAT system and the ESA GEOID initia-
tive, ESA Bulletin – European Space Agency 149 (2012) 45–50.
[29] F. Aguado Agelet, D. Nodar-López, A. G. Muiño, Satellite Communica-
tion Systems based on Small Satellite Platforms, in: 3rd IAA Conference
On University Satellite Missions And Cubesat Workshop, International
Academy of Astronautics, Rome, 2015, iAA-CU-15-0S-0P.
[30] European Space Agency, HumSat / GEOID / GENSO, visited June 07,
2017 (2017).
https://directory.eoportal.org/web/eoportal/-/
humsat
[31] O. Bertolami, A. G. C. Guerra, F. Francisco, J. Villate, Pequenos satélites
em Portugal, contribution to Portugal Space 2030, Fundação para a Ciên-
cia e a Tecnologia (2017).
[32] Universidade de Vigo, Universidade do Porto, Laboratoire d’Analyse et
d’Architecture des Systèmes, Fire-RS - Wildﬁre Picosatellite Constella-
tion & UAVs Remote Sensing: Active ﬁre mapping and management
(2016).
[33] FPVMODEL.COM, HAWKEYE UHF Dipole 433MHZ Antenna, visited
April 12, 2017 (2015).
URL https://www.fpvmodel.com/hawkeye-uhf-dipole-433mhz-antenna{_}g847.
html
[34] A. G. C.
Guerra,
M. Costa,
SatComms Task Software Files,
found in LSTS/dune GitHub repository, feature/humsat branch, and
dune/src/Transports/ folder (2017).
URL https://github.com/LSTS/