Automatic Delay Tuning of a Novel Ring
Resonator-based Photonic Beamformer for a
Transmit Phased Array Antenna
Laurens Bliek, Sander Wahls Senior Member, IEEE, Ilka Visscher, Caterina Taddei, Roelof Bernardus Timens,
Ruud Oldenbeuving, Chris Roeloffzen Member, IEEE, Michel Verhaegen, Member, IEEE
Abstract—We present a novel photonic beamformer for a
fully integrated transmit phased array antenna, together with
an automatic procedure for tuning the delays in this system.
Such an automatic tuning procedure is required because the
large number of actuators makes manual tuning practically
impossible. The antenna system is designed for the purpose of
broadband aircraft-satellite communication in the Ku-band to
provide satellite Internet connections on board the aircraft. The
goal of the beamformer is to automatically steer the transmit
antenna electronically in the direction of the satellite. This is
done using a mix of phase shifters and tunable optical delay lines,
which are all integrated on a chip and laid out in a tree structure.
The Ku-band has a bandwidth of 0.5 GHz. We show how an
optical delay line is automatically conﬁgured over this bandwidth,
providing a delay of approximately 0.4 ns. The tuning algorithm
calculates the best actuator voltages based on past measurements.
This is the ﬁrst time that such an automatic tuning scheme is
used on a photonic beamformer for this type of transmit phased
array antenna. We show that the proposed method is able to
provide accurate beamforming (< 11.25◦phase error over the
whole bandwidth) for two different delay settings.
Index Terms—microwave photonics, photonic beamforming,
phased array antenna, automatic beamformer tuning
I. INTRODUCTION
EAMFORMERS are used to steer the beam of a phased
array antenna by controlling the phase added to the
signal at each antenna element (AE) [1]. This can be done
by providing either a phase shift or a time delay to the signal.
When the phase or delay of the signal corresponding to each
AE has been set correctly according to the desired beam angle,
signals are received or transmitted in the desired direction,
while other directions are suppressed. This results in a highly
directional antenna system for which the beam angle can be
adapted without any mechanical movement. See Figure 1 for
the case of a transmit phased array antenna. A receive antenna
uses the same principle, but in this work we only consider a
transmit antenna.
This research was supported by the Dutch Technology Foundation STW
under Project 13336, and partly by the Netherlands Organisation for Scientiﬁc
Research (NWO) under Project 628.009.012.
Corresponding author: l.bliek@tudelft.nl.
L. Bliek, S. Wahls and M. Verhaegen are with the Delft Center for Systems
and Control, Delft University of Technology, Mekelweg 2, 2628 CD, Delft,
Netherlands.
I. Visscher, C. Taddei, R. B. Timens, R. Oldenbeuving and C. Roeloffzen
are with LioniX International B.V., P.O. Box 456, 7500 AL, Enschede,
Netherlands.
Antenna elements
Fig. 1.
Beamforming for a phased array antenna explained. Each antenna
element transmits the same signal after a certain time delay. This delay can
be chosen in such a way that constructive interference occurs in a certain
direction, making it possible to transmit a highly directional signal with a
high gain and a focused beam.
In order to get the same signal to each AE with a certain
delay, a beamformer for a transmit phased array antenna
consists of splitters and delay elements. These can be arranged
in a tree structure to reduce the required number of delay
elements [2], [3], [4]. The beamformer considered in this work
is part of a transmit phased array antenna system with 1536
AEs. It uses a tree structure with four different splitting stages,
as shown on the top of Figure 2. This system is designed to
be used for aircraft-satellite communication in order to satisfy
the ever-increasing demand of high-speed Internet on board of
aircrafts. This large number of AEs is required to make sure
that the signals have enough power when they arrive at the
satellite [5], [6]. The system establishes an uplink with the
satellite in the Ku-band (14.0 to 14.5 GHz frequency range).
This is the range used to provide satellite Internet connections
on board the aircraft. Therefore, the system will operate under
a bandwidth of 0.5 GHz.
The delay that needs to be provided for one path of the tree
structure depends on the distance between the AEs, which has
been chosen to be 1.03 cm in this work as explained later.
AEs that are close together correspond to only a small delay
difference. This is why the middle of Figure 2 contains differ-
ent types of beamformers: radio frequency (RF) beamformers
are better suited for very small delay values, while photonic
beamformers (explained in the next section) are better suited
for larger delay values [2]. The bottom of Figure 2 shows a top
view of how the AEs are situated on the full antenna system
that consists of 24 transmit tiles. The transmit tiles are 8.24
by 8.24 cm in size and contain 8 × 8 AEs each, resulting in
a 1 × 1536 transmit scheme with 1536 AEs in total. Both the
photonic and RF beamformers are integrated in the transmit
arXiv:1808.04814v2  [physics.app-ph]  11 Jul 2019

--- PAGE BREAK ---

JOURNAL OF LIGHTWAVE TECHNOLOGY, VOL. XX, NO. X, AUGUST 2018
Fig. 2. From top to bottom: tree structure of the full beamformer system with 1536 antenna elements (the highlighted path is explained in the remainder of
the ﬁgure). Photonic and RF beamformer systems, where dashed arrows indicate signals in RF domain and solid arrows indicate signals in the optical domain
(the photonic beamformers are shown in more detail in Figure 3). Full antenna system architecture with 24 transmit tiles containing 64 antenna elements
each.
tile, giving rise to a modular system.
The antenna system is an adapted version of an earlier
proposed phased array receiver [6] that is to be used in transmit
mode. In order to tune the beamformer actuators of these
earlier phased array antenna systems, either a manual tuning
procedure was used [2], [3], which is only possible for a small
number of actuators, or a nonlinear optimization algorithm
based on a physical model of the system was used [4, Sec.
6]. However, the approach that uses a nonlinear optimization
algorithm is very sensitive to model errors [7], requires a
labor-intensive measurement procedure for certain parts of
the physical model [4, App. B], and can not be used while
the system is already running. In this work we describe
the beamformer for the transmit phased array antenna from
Figure 2 together with its requirements, and we show how to
tune this system with a different optimization algorithm. This
online algorithm is not sensitive to model errors and can be
used while the system is running.
II. FULLY INTEGRATED TRANSMIT PHASED ARRAY
ANTENNA
A. Beamformer requirements
In order to determine the requirements of the beamformer,
the delay between the AEs needs to be calculated. This
depends on two factors: the angle of the beam, and the distance
between the AEs. For rectangular array grids, the latter should
be equal to half the wavelength corresponding to the highest
frequency used in the application [2, Sec. V], which is 14.5
GHz in this case. This leads to a distance of 1.03 cm between
two consecutive AEs. As for the beam angle, this is chosen
to be no more than 60 degrees compared to the normal (i.e. a
beam sent straight upwards). The maximum delay τmax that
needs to be provided by each beamformer in Figure 2 can now
be calculated as follows:
τmax = sin(60◦)dmax/c0,
where dmax is the maximum distance between the centers of
the different elements of the beamformer and c0 is the speed
of light. For the rightmost RF beamformer in Figure 2, dmax =
2·0.0103 m (distance between the centers of two diagonally
intersecting AEs), for the other RF beamformer dmax =
2 · 0.0103 m, for the 1 × 4 photonic beamformer dmax =
4·0.0103 m, and for the 1×24 photonic beamformer dmax =
52 + 12 · 0.0824 m. This leads to the following maximum
delays for each beamformer in Figure 2: τmax = 42 ps for
the rightmost RF beamformer, τmax = 84 ps for the other RF
beamformer, τmax = 168 ps for the 1×4 photonic beamformer,
and τmax = 1.214 ns for the other photonic beamformer.
After calculating the maximum delays for each beamformer
subsystem, the requirements for the phase can be calculated.
The phase response of each beamformer should be a linear
function of the frequency, with a slope equal to −2πτ, where
τ is the required delay. Traditionally, phase shifters are used
for beamformer subsystems, which provide a phase shift that
is a constant function of the frequency. In other words, phase

--- PAGE BREAK ---

JOURNAL OF LIGHTWAVE TECHNOLOGY, VOL. XX, NO. X, AUGUST 2018
Fig. 3. Photonic beamformer design with several highlighted subsystems. Subsystems 1. and 3. belong to the 1 × 24 photonic beamformer in Figure 2, while
the other three subsystems belong to the 1 × 4 photonic beamformer. Dashed arrows indicate signals in RF domain and solid arrows indicate signals in the
optical domain. The small circles indicate the presence of on-chip optical ring resonators. Power and phase responses of the signal at several locations on the
chip are shown on the bottom, where the desired phase response is indicated by a dashed line.
shifters provide a linear phase response with a slope of 0. For
very small delays (e.g. τmax < 100 ps in this case), using such
a constant phase response with a slope of 0 instead of −2πτ
gives a negligible slope mismatch, but for larger delays this
mismatch will have a negative inﬂuence on the antenna beam.
This problem is called beam squint.
The effects of beam squint are negligible in the two RF
beamformer subsystems in Figure 2. Therefore, these beam-
formers are based on phase shifters that change the phase of
the RF signal. The photonic beamformers, however, need to
deal with larger delays. Therefore, they make use of optical
delay lines rather than phase shifters. The key principle here is
that the RF signals are converted to the optical domain, where
their phase is adjusted accordingly, and then they are converted
back to RF domain. This combination of RF and photonic
signal processing has many advantages such as low loss, low
weight, and large bandwidth, especially when implemented on
a chip [2], [3], [8], [9], [10], [11]. In this work, each transmit
tile from Figure 2 is connected to a corresponding chip, as
explained later on in this section.
The way the photonic beamformers provide a linear phase
response with the correct slope is by using a cascade of optical
ring resonators as tunable optical delay lines, arranged in a tree
structure [2], [3], [12]. These ring resonators control the phase
response of the signal by using thermo-optic heater actuators.
Though some ﬂuctuations in the phase response are allowed,
these ﬂuctuations should not be larger than 11.25◦[3].
B. Photonic beamformer chip design
Figure 3 shows the chip design of the photonic beamform-
ers. The chip contains optical ring resonators that each belong
to different subsystems. The effect of the different subsystems
on the frequency response of the signal is shown as well. An
RF splitter (subsystem 1. in Figure 3) makes sure that the
same baseband signal arrives at all of the 24 transmit tiles
shown in Figure 2. Each transmit tile is connected to one
chip containing photonic and RF beamformer systems. The
photonic beamformers use a combination of TriPleXTM waveg-
uide technology [13] and indium phosphide (InP). TriPleXTM
is a silicon nitride planar waveguide technology developed by
LioniX International.
The corresponding power response of the electrical signal
entering the chip in Figure 3 is that of a broadband signal
centered around the frequency fRF
= 14.25 GHz in the
Ku-band. This signal is modulated on an optical carrier with
a Mach-Zehnder modulator (electrical-to-optical conversion),
after which the optical signal consists of the optical carrier fc
in the THz range and two sidebands. One of these sidebands is
suppressed by the optical sideband ﬁlter (OSBF, subsystem 2.
in Figure 3). This is done to reduce the required bandwidth[2].
After this stage the signal goes through a cascade of ﬁve ring
resonators (subsystem 3. in Figure 3) that supply the required
delay for one branch of the 1×24 beamformer. As mentioned
earlier, the maximum delay that needs to be provided by the
1 × 24 beamformer is τmax = 1.214 ns. This should be no
problem for a cascade of ﬁve ring resonators, as beamforming
with a cascade of only three ring resonators has been illustrated
for delays of more than 1.2 ns with a bandwidth of 0.5 GHz
using a manual tuning approach [14]. With ﬁve ring resonators,
these results can be achieved with even higher accuracy.
The signal then arrives at a 1 × 4 optical beamforming
network (OBFN, susbystem 4. in Figure 3), consisting of an
optical splitter and more ring resonators. These ring resonators
provide a linear phase response for a maximum delay of
168 ps, as calculated earlier in this section. As seen in the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

JOURNAL OF LIGHTWAVE TECHNOLOGY, VOL. XX, NO. X, AUGUST 2018
phase response in Figure 3, the linear phase response is
only provided in the region of interest, the sideband around
frequency fc + fRF . However, the OBFN only makes sure
that this linear phase response has the correct slope, not the
correct absolute phase. The last subsystem (subsystem 5. in
Figure 3) provides an additional phase shift so that the correct
phase response is provided at the sideband and also at the
optical carrier frequency fc. This is again done with optical
ring resonators, using a principle called separate carrier tuning
(SCT) [15] (see also Section III-D). Finally, the signal is
converted back to RF domain with photodetectors (optical-to-
electrical conversion), after which it can be converted to the
correct frequency range for transmission (14.0 to 14.5 GHz).
The ring resonators in the beamformer subsystems are all
actuated with two heaters: one for the phase, and one for the
tunable coupling [16], [14]. By changing the voltages of these
two heater actuators for several ring resonators, the magnitude
and phase response of the subsystems can be altered. There are
27 ring resonators shown in Figure 3, resulting in 54 heaters.
Three other heaters in the OSBF subsystem and three heaters
in the 1-to-4 splitter are not shown in the ﬁgure but increase
the number of heaters to 60. So the total number of heaters in
the two photonic beamformer stages is 24 × 60 = 1440. One
of the main reasons for investigating automatic procedures is
that tuning all these heaters correctly by hand would not be
practical.
III. AUTOMATIC TUNING RESULTS
A. Automatic tuning method
In this paper we look at an automatic tuning procedure for
one branch of the OBFN subsystem. The traditional approach
to automatically tune one branch of the photonic beamformer
is to use a nonlinear optimization algorithm that minimizes
a performance metric [4, Sec. 6]. An example performance
metric is the mean square error (MSE) between the desired and
actual phase response of the system (φD(f, V ) and φP (f, V )
respectively):
(φD(fk, V ) −φP (fk, V ))2 .
Here, V represents a vector of actuator voltages while the
fk represent the different frequencies that are relevant to the
system. The actual phase response φP (f, V ) can be calcu-
lated from physical models of the heaters and optical ring
resonators.
The procedure described above has several disadvantages.
First of all, we have shown in earlier work that even very
small errors in the physical model can have a large detrimental
effect on the accuracy of the procedure [7]. Such model errors
can never completely be avoided. Second, although physical
models are available for each system component, the heater
actuators inﬂuence each other by means of electrical and
thermal crosstalk. This crosstalk can also be modeled, but this
requires a number of measurements that is at least equal to
the square of the number of heater actuators [4, App. B]. This
becomes a problem when the number of heater actuators is
large, and it gives even more room for model errors. Finally,
Fig. 4. Schematic for the automatic tuning method.
the procedure has to be performed before actually running the
system, and any changes to the system are not automatically
taken into account.
To avoid the drawbacks mentioned above, recently auto-
matic tuning algorithms based on machine learning techniques
have been derived [7], [17], [18]. These algorithms use system
measurements in the performance metric. Instead of calcu-
lating the phase response from physical models, the phase
response is measured directly:
(φD(fk, V ) −φM(fk, V ))2 .
Here, φM(f, V ) denotes the measured phase response. This
data-based algorithm learns the relation between the actuator
voltages and the performance metric in (3) and chooses those
voltages that optimize this metric. After several iterations, the
algorithm converges to a setting of actuator voltages V with
the best performance according to the data-based performance
metric (3). Here, each iteration consists of updating the per-
formance metric with the measured phase response, ﬁnding
the optimal values for V , and setting the actuator voltages to
these values and performing a new measurement. In this work
this is done with the data-based online nonlinear extremum-
seeker (DONE) algorithm [17]. See Figure 4. This algorithm
is especially designed for systems where the measurements
take some time to be performed, where measurement noise
is present, and where the relation between the MSE and
the actuators is too complicated to model accurately. The
beamformer system described in this paper is an example of
such a system, and the DONE algorithm has already been
successfully applied to a simulation of a beamformer system
with 8 antenna elements [17]. Using such an automatic tuning
procedure on this system with over a thousand actuators is
unavoidable if it is ever to be used in a real life application.
Besides this, the DONE algorithm only uses the MSE in (3),
which is a single scalar value. In a practical situation, one
can thus use very simple metrics such as, e.g., the total
output power in order to guide the automatic tuning algorithm.
In this paper, where the performance is shown of both the
automatic tuning method and a human expert that relies on

--- PAGE BREAK ---

JOURNAL OF LIGHTWAVE TECHNOLOGY, VOL. XX, NO. X, AUGUST 2018
the complete phase response for tuning, we however used the
average squared phase error in order to guide the automatic
tuning method such that both use a similar criterion. We
emphasize that the human expert knew the phase error
frequency (by looking at the frequency response), while the
automatic tuning method only knew the mean squared phase
error that is obtained after averaging over all frequencies. It
should be noted that the traditional approach with the nonlinear
optimization method also uses a scalar-valued objective, but it
becomes very slow and struggles with local minima when the
output power is used as the objective [19, Sec. 4.4.2].
Unlike the traditional approach (2), the data-based ap-
proach (3) does not require a physical model (including a
model for the heater crosstalk) and is therefore not sensitive
to model errors. It is also an online algorithm, which means
that it can be used while the system is running, and it will
continually search for better conﬁgurations. This can also
easily be adapted to allow the procedure to work for systems
that change over time, which is crucial when applied to
antenna systems on moving vehicles such as aircrafts. On
moving vehicles, the beam angle changes over time, and
therefore the objective function also changes over time.
B. Optical sideband ﬁlter tuning
Earlier in this paper, several subsystems of the photonic
beamformer were described. See Figure 3. The OSBF and
SCT subsystems drastically reduce the required bandwidth of
the system [2], [15]. The goal of the OSBF is to ﬁlter out one
of the sidebands resulting from the modulation scheme used
for the E/O conversion, as shown in the frequency responses
of Figure 3. The result is an optical single sideband full carrier
modulation that can be used by the OBFN. With one sideband
ﬁltered out, beamforming would need to be performed over
the sideband, the optical carrier frequency, and the frequencies
in between, giving a total of 14.5 GHz instead of the whole
region of 29 GHz. To further reduce the bandwidth, the SCT
subsystem is used to ensure that the correct phase is achieved
at the optical carrier frequency (see Section III-D). If both the
OSBF and SCT subsystems are tuned correctly, a linear phase
response only needs to be provided in one sideband with a
bandwidth of 0.5 GHz.
Figure 5 shows the power response of the full beamformer
system after tuning the OSBF subsystem by hand. This was
done by measuring the power response with a vector network
analyzer (VNA) and tuning the OSBF heaters until the desired
response was achieved. The shown frequencies are relative to
the optical carrier frequency. The response features a stopband,
that ﬁlters out one of the sidebands as shown in Figure 3,
and a passband that keeps the other sideband. The difference
between the stopband and passband is 30 dB.
The automatic tuning method has also been applied to the
OSBF subsystem, see the end of Section III-C. No matter
which tuning method is used, once tuned, the heaters can be
set to the desired values within 200 µs.
C. Automatic optical beamforming network tuning
The optical beamforming network (OBFN) subsystem is
used to provide different delays to the signals of each antenna
Frequency (GHz)
-110
-100
Power (dB)
30dB
Fig. 5. Measured power response of the full beamformer system after tuning
the optical sideband ﬁlter by hand. Frequencies are shown relative to the
optical carrier frequency.
element in such a way that a strong signal is transmitted in one
speciﬁc direction by positive interference. The correct delays
can be calculated from the desired beam angle and the distance
between two antenna elements, as shown in the introduction.
This leads to a maximum delay of 168 ps for the 1×4 photonic
beamformer, which is the one investigated in this work. Larger
delay values were considered in this work to show that the
maximum delays can indeed be achieved, to allow different
antenna conﬁgurations or scan angles, and for better visibility
of the measurements.
The desired group delay response for each OBFN path is a
ﬂat response with a value between 0 ps and the maximum
group delay value, depending on the desired beam angle.
The group delay response can be made ﬂat by using a serial
conﬁguration of ring resonators for each OBFN path [14]. This
ﬂat response has to be provided over the whole frequency
range of interest, which would require a combination of
many ring resonators. However, by implementing the SCT
scheme [15] explained in Section III-D, the only part of the
frequency domain for which a ﬂat group delay response needs
to be provided is the sideband that is not ﬁltered by the
OSBF, as shown in Fig. 3. This greatly reduces the required
number of ring resonators and therefore the complexity of
the system, because there is a trade-off between the required
number of ring resonators, the maximum group delay, and the
bandwidth [2].
The procedure for tuning the OBFN is similar to the one for
tuning the OSBF: the group delay response is measured with a
VNA, and the heaters of each ring resonator are tuned until the
desired group delay response is achieved. Here, we made use
of the automatic tuning method described in this paper. The
top of Figure 6 shows the resulting phase response of both the
manual and the automatic tuning procedures of one path of the
photonic beamformer system for two different delay settings
(250 ps and 408 ps). The 1-to-4 splitter shown in Figure 3 has
been set to provide this path with 100% of the signal power.
The manual tuning procedure aimed at providing a linear phase
response for a bandwidth of at least 0.5 GHz, though no exact

--- PAGE BREAK ---

JOURNAL OF LIGHTWAVE TECHNOLOGY, VOL. XX, NO. X, AUGUST 2018
Frequency (GHz)
-120
-100
Magnitude (dB)
408 ps (manual)
250 ps (manual)
408 ps (auto)
250 ps (auto)
Frequency (GHz)
Phase response (degrees)
408 ps (manual)
250 ps (manual)
408 ps (auto)
250 ps (auto)
Desired phase
Frequency (GHz)
Phase response (degrees)
408 ps (manual)
250 ps (manual)
408 ps (auto)
250 ps (auto)
Desired phase
Fig. 6.
Measured phase response (top) and power response (bottom) of one path of the full beamformer system from Figure 3 after tuning the optical
beamforming network automatically (using the DONE algorithm) and by hand for two different delay settings. The right side zooms in on the highlighted
region. Desired phase responses are shown with dashed lines. The maximum difference between the measured and desired phase response for the four plots
is shown in Table I. Frequencies are shown relative to the optical carrier frequency, and the phase responses are shown relative to the phase response of the
system with no delay.
frequencies were provided. The automatic procedure aimed
at providing a linear phase response for the same bandwidth,
but around a frequency of 5.5 GHz. Since all signals can be
converted to the correct transmit frequencies later (for example
with a RF mixer), only the bandwidth is considered relevant
in this work, not the exact frequencies. All results were time
averaged to reduce noise.
The difference between the desired and the measured phase
response must remain within 11.25◦in the bandwidth of
interest. The maximum errors are shown in Table I. As can
be seen, all phase errors remain well within the requirements.
This shows that the automatic tuning procedure can be used
instead of the manual tuning procedure for the photonic
beamformer system.
The bottom of Figure 6 shows the corresponding power re-
sponse. For the manual tuning method this is similar to the one
shown in Figure 5, with some inﬂuence of the ring resonators.
For the automatic tuning method, the magnitude response was
tuned automatically too, using the same procedure for the
OSBF as for tuning the OBFN, with the magnitude instead of
the phase response. However, some improvement is possible
here, as the loss in the passband could still be reduced. It
seems that the MSE criterion does not work too well with the
logarithmic scale. The MSE criterion is especially sensitive to
data points in the stop band in this case. This was already
TABLE I
MAXIMUM PHASE ERROR IN DEGREES FOR TUNING THE OBFN
SUBSYSTEM AUTOMATICALLY (A) AND BY HAND (M) FOR DIFFERENT
DELAY VALUES. ALL ERRORS ARE WELL BELOW THE MAXIMUM
ALLOWED ERROR OF 11.25◦.
Delay
408 ps
250 ps
408 ps
250 ps
Method
Max error
6.2◦
4.9◦
5.5◦
6.4◦
somewhat circumvented by scaling the data points in the
stopband by a factor 0.3, but other objective functions should
be considered in the future.
After tuning the OSBF, while tuning the OBFN, heater
crosstalk could cause an unwanted perturbation in the OSBF
ﬁlter response. For this reason, the OSBF actuators were still
included in the tuning procedure while tuning the OBFN
automatically, allowing the algorithm to counteract the heater
crosstalk and ﬁne-tune the system. This lead to stability in the
ﬁlter response of the OSBF, i.e., there was no deterioration in
performance in the OSBF while tuning the OBFN.
D. Separate carrier tuning
The results of the previous subsection show that both the
manual and automatic tuning procedures result in a phase
response with the correct slope, satisfying the requirements.
However, besides the slope of the phase response, the height
of the phase response also needs to be set correctly [15],
[20]. Where the slope of the phase response is controlled
by the OBFN subsystem, the height of the phase response
is controlled by the separate carrier tuning (SCT) subsystem.
This is also shown in Figure 3. More information about the
SCT subsystem can be found in [15].
Like the other subsystems, the SCT subsystem makes use of
optical ring resonators. Two ring resonators are tuned in such a
way that they affect the phase response in the region between
the optical carrier frequency and the sideband. This region
contains no information, so it is not necessary to follow the
desired linear phase response here, which would require a large
quantity of ring resonators because of the large difference in
frequency between the optical carrier and the sideband. Tuning
the two ring resonators of the SCT subsystem gives an extra
phase shift while leaving the shape and the slope of the phase
response unaffected. This ensures that the phase response

--- PAGE BREAK ---

JOURNAL OF LIGHTWAVE TECHNOLOGY, VOL. XX, NO. X, AUGUST 2018
Frequency (GHz)
-1000
-500
1000
Phase response (°)
408 ps (manual)
250 ps (manual)
408 ps (auto)
250 ps (auto)
Desired phase
Frequency (GHz)
-1000
-500
1000
Phase response (°)
408 ps (manual)
250 ps (manual)
408 ps (auto)
250 ps (auto)
Desired phase
360°
360°
Fig. 7. Measured phase response of the full beamformer system before (left) and after (right) manually tuning the SCT subsystem. The word ‘auto’ in the
legend refers to the automatic tuning of the OSBF and OBFN subsystems. Using the SCT principle, the height of the phase responses is adapted in such a
way that the corresponding linear responses meet at the optical carrier frequency, up to multiples of 360 degrees, as indicated by the red circles. These results
have also been published in [20].
follows the desired linear phase response at the optical carrier
frequency too. It should be noted that phase differences of
multiples of 360◦do not affect the system [15]. This makes
it theoretically possible to use only one ring resonator for this
adjustment, though in practice it is easier to use two of them.
The ring resonators in the SCT subsystem were adjusted by
hand after tuning their heater actuators in such a way that
the ring resonators only operate in the region near the optical
carrier frequency.
Figure 7 shows the effect of not using the SCT subsystem
on the left. Although the phase response has the desired slope,
there is a phase mismatch at the optical carrier frequency (at 0
GHz). Tuning the ring resonators of the SCT subsystem solves
this problem. The effect of tuning the SCT subsystem is shown
in the same ﬁgure on the right. This time, the phase responses
have been shifted up or down in such a way that the corre-
sponding linear phase responses are a multiple of 360 degrees
off at the optical carrier frequency. The accuracy can still be
improved, however: due to their proximity on the photonic
chip, the heaters of the SCT subsystem slightly inﬂuence the
heaters of the OBFN subsystem, which leads to small changes
to the slope of the phase response. This causes the desired
phase response at the carrier to be about 30 degrees off, so
exact multiples of 360 degrees are not yet achieved. These
errors are unacceptable for practical applications. However,
using the same automatic tuning procedure for this subsystem
together with the other two subsystems could circumvent this
problem. This remains for future work.
E. Towards a fully automated transmit antenna tile
Besides testing the proposed automatic tuning procedure on
all of the three different subsystems described in this section
and improving the objective for the OSBF subsystem, one
more step is required to achieve a fully automated trans-
mit antenna tile in a practical situation. First of all, since
phase response measurements require a measurement set-up
that is too cumbersome for a real-life application, the effect
of using a different criterion needs to be investigated. As
mentioned earlier, the proposed automatic tuning procedure
uses only a scalar value to tune the system, even with the
phase measurements used in this work, therefore the criterion
used in practice is allowed to be scalar-valued. The output
power of the system is an example of such a more practical
criterion. Traditional nonlinear optimization algorithms based
on physical models of this criterion are known to struggle
with local minima [19, p. 43]. However, we found that using
the DONE algorithm on this same criterion [19, eq. 4.4] in a
simple simulation, the global optimum was found, even when
tuning four beamformer branches at the same time. The phase
errors were also within 11.25◦for all four branches. This
indicates that it should be possible to tune all paths of a 1 × 4
photonic beamformer using the automatic tuning procedure
with a power criterion. A next step would be to verify this
experimentally in a real system.
The second step concerns the tuning of the 1 × 24 beam-
former, indicated by the ﬁve ring resonators of subsystem 3
in Figure 3. As mentioned earlier, manual tuning of these ﬁve
rings has already been shown to achieve the desired delay
values [14], and automatically tuning these ﬁve rings should
give no problems. However, tuning these ﬁve rings for 24
different beamformer paths using only one scalar value as
feedback is much more challenging, as this would increase
the number of variables to be tuned simultaneously to 240.
Still, this number is a drastic reduction compared to the
situation where all heaters in the full photonic beamformer are
tuned simultaneously (1440 variables). The DONE algorithm
has already been successfully applied to a problem with 150
variables in the past [17], so increasing this number to 240 is
not unachievable in the near future.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

JOURNAL OF LIGHTWAVE TECHNOLOGY, VOL. XX, NO. X, AUGUST 2018
IV. CONCLUSION
We have proposed a novel photonic beamformer for a
transmit phased array antenna. The beamformer is based on
optical ring resonators and is fully integrated on a chip. We
have investigated manual and automatic procedures for tuning
the delays of the photonic beamformer. Automatic procedures
are essential in real-life applications where thousands of actu-
ators are considered and where a limited number of variables
can be measured, such as the signal-to-noise ratio. Both
the manual and automatic procedures provided beamforming
functionalities with a phase error of less than 11.25◦over the
whole frequency band that contains signal information. This
is the ﬁrst time that part of this transmit antenna tile has been
tuned automatically.
The system is designed with aircraft-satellite communi-
cation in mind as the main application, providing satellite
Internet connections on board the aircraft using the Ku-
band. The separate carrier tuning principle greatly reduces the
operating bandwidth for the photonic beamformer, from 29
GHz to 0.5 GHz. The ring resonator-based subsystems of the
beamformer make squint-free beamforming possible. A fully
automated transmit antenna tile remains for future work.
APPENDIX A
MEASUREMENT SETUP
Figure 8 shows the measurement set-up for the frequency re-
sponse measurements shown in this paper. A Rohde& Schwarz
ZVA40 VNA generated a 50 MHz RF signal to modulate a
laser with a Mach-Zehnder modulator. The modulated optical
signal was coupled into the beamformer control box. The
control box was connected via USB to a laptop with heater
control software. This laptop also contained the automatic tun-
ing software and software for reading the VNA measurements.
The integrated photodetectors inside the control box were
connected with RF cables to the second VNA port. Although
integrated modulators were also available, these have not been
used in order to prevent crosstalk with the integrated detectors.
The VNA measurements were sent to the laptop with the
automatic tuning and heater control software via an ethernet
cable. The phase-shift method [3, Sec. IV-A] was used for
the group delay and power response measurements, using a
function generator for the laser. With this method, the phase
response shown on the VNA is actually equivalent to the group
delay response of the system, so the objective (3) minimized
by the DONE algorithm is actually equal to the mean square
error between the desired and measured group delay response.
In Figures 6 and 7, after the minimization procedure, the
phase response was measured directly using a frequency sweep
on the VNA (without the external trigger from the function
generator). Here, the laser current was chosen in such a way
that the optical carrier would be at 0 GHz in Figure 5 after
tuning the OSBF.
APPENDIX B
ALGORITHM SETTINGS
The automatic tuning algorithm used in this paper contains
several hyper-parameters that are explained and investigated
TABLE II
VALUES OF THE HYPER-PARAMETERS USED BY THE AUTOMATIC TUNING
ALGORITHM.
Hyper-parameter
Value
(OSBF
tuning)
Value
(OBFN
tuning)
Total
num.
measurements
2000
1000
Num. of basis func-
tions
3000
3000
Regularization
parameter
Standard deviation of
frequencies
Exploration parameter
0.01
0.05
Sliding window size
in [17]. Their values as used in this paper are shown in
Table II for the OSBF and OBFN tuning results. The last
value indicates the size of the sliding window: only the last
60 measurements are used in updating the model used by
the algorithm, using the same adaptation of the algorithm as
in [21].
REFERENCES
[1] R. C. Hansen, Phased array antennas.
John Wiley & Sons, 2009, vol.
213.
[2] A. Meijerink, C. G. Roeloffzen, R. Meijerink, L. Zhuang, D. A.
Marpaung, M. J. Bentum, M. Burla, J. Verpoorte, P. Jorna, A. Hulzinga
et al., “Novel ring resonator-based integrated photonic beamformer for
broadband phased array receive antennaspart I: Design and performance
analysis,” J. Lightwave Technol., vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 3–18, 2010.
[3] L. Zhuang, C. G. Roeloffzen, A. Meijerink, M. Burla, D. A. Marpaung,
A. Leinse, M. Hoekman, R. G. Heideman, and W. van Etten, “Novel
ring resonator-based integrated photonic beamformer for broadband
phased array receive antennaspart II: Experimental prototype,” Journal
of lightwave technology, vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 19–31, 2010.
[4] L. Zhuang, “Ring resonator-based broadband photonic beam former for
phased array antennas,” Ph.D. dissertation, 2010.
[5] J. Verpoorte, H. Schippers, P. Jorna, C. G. Roeloffzen, D. A. Marpaung,
R. Baggen, and B. Sanadgol, “Architectures for ku-band broadband
airborne satellite communication antennas,” in 32nd EAS Antenna Work-
shop, 2010.
National Aerospace Laboratory NLR, 2010.
[6] M. van der Vossen, G. Voshaar, C. Roeloffzen, A. Hulzinga, and M. Iven,
“Design of a highly integrated Ku-band planar broadband phased array
receiver with dual polarization,” in Microwave Conference (EuMC),
2014 44th European.
IEEE, 2014, pp. 1695–1698.
[7] L. Bliek, M. Verhaegen, and S. Wahls, “Data-driven minimization
with random feature expansions for optical beam forming network
tuning,” in 16th IFAC Workshop on Control Applications of Optimization
(CAO2015), vol. 48, no. 25, 2015, pp. 166 – 171.
[8] J. Capmany and D. Novak, “Microwave photonics combines two
worlds,” Nature photonics, vol. 1, no. 6, p. 319, 2007.
[9] N. Shi, M. Li, Y. Deng, L. Zhang, S. Sun, J. Tang, W. Li, and N. Zhu,
“Experimental demonstration of a multi-target detection technique using
an x-band optically steered phased array radar,” Optics Express, vol. 24,
no. 13, pp. 14 438–14 450, 2016.
[10] L. Zhang, M. Li, N. Shi, X. Zhu, S. Sun, J. Tang, W. Li, and N. Zhu,
“Photonic true time delay beamforming technique with ultra-fast beam
scanning,” Optics express, vol. 25, no. 13, pp. 14 524–14 532, 2017.
[11] D. Marpaung, C. Roeloffzen, R. Heideman, A. Leinse, S. Sales, and
J. Capmany, “Integrated microwave photonics,” Laser & Photonics
Reviews, vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 506–538, 2013.
[12] L. Zhuang, C. Roeloffzen, R. Heideman, A. Borreman, A. Meijerink, and
W. Van Etten, “Single-chip optical beam forming network in LPCVD
waveguide technology based on optical ring resonators,” in International
Topical Meeting on Microwave Photonics, 2006. MWP’06. IEEE, 2006,
pp. 1–4.
[13] C. G. Roeloffzen, M. Hoekman, E. J. Klein, L. S. Wevers, R. B.
Timens, D. Marchenko, D. Geskus, R. Dekker, A. Alippi, R. Grootjans
et al., “Low-loss Si3N4 TriPleX optical waveguides: Technology and

--- PAGE BREAK ---

JOURNAL OF LIGHTWAVE TECHNOLOGY, VOL. XX, NO. X, AUGUST 2018
Fig. 8. Measurement set-up for the frequency response measurements used in this paper.
applications overview,” IEEE journal of selected topics in quantum
electronics, vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 1–21, 2018.
[14] P. Megret, C. Roeloffzen, M. Wuilpart, L. Zhuang, R. Heideman,
S. Bette, A. Borreman, N. Staquet, and W. van Etten, “Ring resonator-
based tunable optical delay line in LPCVD waveguide technology,”
in 10th Annual Symposium of the IEEE/LEOS Benelux Chapter 2005,
Mons, Belgium, 2005, pp. 79–82.
[15] M. Burla, M. R. Khan, D. A. Marpaung, L. Zhuang, C. G. Roeloffzen,
A. Leinse, M. Hoekman, and R. Heideman, “Separate carrier tuning
scheme for integrated optical delay lines in photonic beamformers,” in
International Topical Meeting on Microwave Photonics, 2011 & Mi-
crowave Photonics Conference, 2011 Asia-Paciﬁc, MWP/APMP. IEEE,
2011, pp. 65–68.
[16] L. F. Stokes, M. Chodorow, and H. J. Shaw, “All-single-mode ﬁber
resonator,” Optics Letters, vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 288–290, 1982.
[17] L. Bliek, H. R. G. W. Verstraete, M. Verhaegen, and S. Wahls, “Online
optimization with costly and noisy measurements using random Fourier
expansions,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning
Systems, vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 167–182, Jan 2018.
[18] L. Bliek, H. Verstraete, S. Wahls, R. B. Timens, R. Oldenbeuving,
C. Roeloffzen, and M. Verhaegen, “Automatic tuning of a ring resonator-
based optical delay line for optical beamforming,” in Symposium on
Information Theory and Signal Processing in the Benelux, 2017. IEEE,
2017, pp. 23–24.
[19] R. Blokpoel, “Staggered delay tuning algorithms for ring resonators in
optical beam forming networks,” Master’s thesis, 2007.
[20] C. Roeloffzen, I. Visscher, C. Taddei, D. Geskus, R. Oldenbeuving,
J. Epping, R. B. Timens, P. van Dijk, R. Heideman, M. Hoekman,
R. Grootjans, L. Bliek, S. Wahls, and M. Verhaegen, “Integrated
microwave
photonics
5G,”
Conference
Lasers
Electro-Optics.
Optical Society of America, 2018, p. JTh3D.2.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.osapublishing.org/abstract.cfm?URI=
CLEO QELS-2018-JTh3D.2
[21] P. Pozzi, D. Wilding, O. Soloviev, H. Verstraete, L. Bliek, G. Vdovin, and
M. Verhaegen, “High speed wavefront sensorless aberration correction in
digital micromirror based confocal microscopy,” Optics Express, vol. 25,
no. 2, pp. 949–959, 2017.