Publications of the Astronomical Society of Australia (PASA)
doi: 10.1017/pas.2018.xxx.
Cosmology with Phase 1 of the Square Kilometre Array
Red Book 2018: Technical speciﬁcations and performance forecasts
Square Kilometre Array Cosmology Science Working Group: David J. Bacon1, Richard A. Battye2,∗, Philip
Bull3, Stefano Camera4,5,6,2, Pedro G. Ferreira7, Ian Harrison2,7, David Parkinson8, Alkistis Pourtsidou3,
Mário G. Santos9,10,11, Laura Wolz12,∗, Filipe Abdalla13,14, Yashar Akrami15,16, David Alonso7, Sambatra
Andrianomena9,10,17, Mario Ballardini9,18, José Luis Bernal19,20, Daniele Bertacca21,36, Carlos A.P. Bengaly9,
Anna Bonaldi22, Camille Bonvin23, Michael L. Brown2, Emma Chapman24, Song Chen9, Xuelei Chen25,
Steven Cunnington1, Tamara M. Davis27, Clive Dickinson2, José Fonseca9,36, Keith Grainge2, Stuart
Harper2, Matt J. Jarvis7,9, Roy Maartens1,9, Natasha Maddox28, Hamsa Padmanabhan29, Jonathan R.
Pritchard24, Alvise Raccanelli19, Marzia Rivi13,18, Sambit Roychowdhury2, Martin Sahlén30, Dominik J.
Schwarz31, Thilo M. Siewert31, Matteo Viel32, Francisco Villaescusa-Navarro33, Yidong Xu25, Daisuke
Yamauchi34, Joe Zuntz35
Afﬁliations listed after references
∗Corresponding Authors: richard.battye@manchester.ac.uk and laura.wolz@unimelb.edu.au
Abstract
We present a detailed overview of the cosmological surveys that will be carried out with Phase 1 of the Square
Kilometre Array (SKA1), and the science that they will enable. We highlight three main surveys: a medium-deep
continuum weak lensing and low-redshift spectroscopic HI galaxy survey over 5,000 deg2; a wide and deep
continuum galaxy and HI intensity mapping survey over 20,000 deg2 from z = 0.35−3; and a deep, high-redshift
HI intensity mapping survey over 100 deg2 from z = 3−6. Taken together, these surveys will achieve an array
of important scientiﬁc goals: measuring the equation of state of dark energy out to z ∼3 with percent-level
precision measurements of the cosmic expansion rate; constraining possible deviations from General Relativity
on cosmological scales by measuring the growth rate of structure through multiple independent methods;
mapping the structure of the Universe on the largest accessible scales, thus constraining fundamental properties
such as isotropy, homogeneity, and non-Gaussianity; and measuring the HI density and bias out to z = 6.
These surveys will also provide highly complementary clustering and weak lensing measurements that have
independent systematic uncertainties to those of optical surveys like LSST and Euclid, leading to a multitude of
synergies that can improve constraints signiﬁcantly beyond what optical or radio surveys can achieve on their
own. This document, the 2018 Red Book, provides reference technical speciﬁcations, cosmological parameter
forecasts, and an overview of relevant systematic effects for the three key surveys, and will be regularly updated
by the Cosmology Science Working Group in the run up to start of operations and the Key Science Programme of
SKA1.
Keywords: Radio Telescopes, Cosmology, Galaxy Redshift Surveys, Weak Lensing, Intensity Mapping.
CONTENTS
Introduction and rationale
Cosmological surveys with SKA1
SKA1-MID . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
SKA1-LOW . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Proposed cosmology surveys . . . . . . . . . .
Survey Processing Requirements . . . . . . . .
Synergies with other surveys
. . . . . . . . . .
Fiducial cosmological model and extensions .
Continuum galaxy surveys
Modeling the continuum sky . . . . . . . . . .
Weak lensing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.2.1
Cosmic shear simulations for SKA . . .
3.2.2
Results from autocorrelation . . . . . .
3.2.3
Results from radio-optical cosmic
shear cross-correlations . . . . . . . . .
Angular Correlation Function and Integrated
Sachs Wolfe Effect . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.3.1
Forecasting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
3.3.2
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Cosmic dipole . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
3.4.1
Forecasting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
arXiv:1811.02743v1  [astro-ph.CO]  7 Nov 2018

--- PAGE BREAK ---

3.4.2
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
HI galaxy redshift survey
Survey characteristics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
Cosmological probes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.2.1
Baryon Acoustic Oscillations and Red-
shift Space Distortions . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.2.2
Doppler magniﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.2.3
Direct peculiar velocity measurements
4.2.4
Void statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4.2.5
Particle dark matter searches in cross-
correlation with γray maps . . . . . . . 19
4.2.6
Cross-correlation with gravitational
wave sources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.2.7
HI model uncertainties
. . . . . . . . . 19
HI intensity mapping
The HI signal and power spectrum . . . . . . . 21
5.1.1
Temperature and bias . . . . . . . . . . 21
5.1.2
Power Spectrum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
Cosmological probes using HI Intensity Map-
ping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
5.2.1
Baryon Acoustic Oscillations and Red-
shift Space Distortions . . . . . . . . . . 23
5.2.2
Ultra-large scale effects
. . . . . . . . . 23
5.2.3
HI detection via synergies with optical
surveys . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
5.2.4
Neutrino masses
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
5.2.5
Probing inﬂationary features . . . . . . 25
5.2.6
Unveiling the nature of dark matter . . 27
5.2.7
Photometric redshift calibration . . . . 27
Systematics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
5.3.1
Foregrounds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
5.3.2
Red Noise
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5.3.3
Bandpass Calibration
. . . . . . . . . . 29
5.3.4
RFI from Navigation Satellites
. . . . . 29
Discussion and conclusions
1 INTRODUCTION AND RATIONALE
Recent progress in deﬁning the standard cosmological
model - known as ΛCDM - has been dominated by observa-
tions of the Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB, Hinshaw
et al. 2013; Planck Collaboration et al. 2016a, 2018). Maps of
the microwave sky made by the Planck satellite between 30
and 857 GHz, have allowed almost cosmic variance limited
measurements of the temperature anisotropy spectrum
out to multipoles in excess of ℓ= 1000 as well as high ﬁ-
delity measurements of the polarization of the CMB. These
measurements have constrained the ﬁve of the standard
six parameters ΛCDM to 1% precision and the ﬁnal one
(the optical depth to reionization) to 10%. The parameter
constraints from CMB observations are broadly compat-
ible with other cosmological indicators such as measure-
ments of the cosmic distance scale using standard candles
(Cepheids and Supernovae, Astier et al. 2006) and number
counts of clusters of galaxies (Planck Collaboration et al.,
2016c).
A wide range of physical phenomena can be probed
beyond the ΛCDM model. These include the dark sector
which is responsible for cosmic acceleration, massive neu-
trinos and primordial non-Gaussianity. Although these phe-
nomena can be constrained with further observations of
the CMB, probes of large scale structure, mapping the Uni-
verse at relatively lower redshifts, are essential to break
some of the degeneracies inherent in CMB observations.
Measurements of the matter power spectrum through
galaxy redshift surveys have been around for some time
(Cole et al., 2005), indeed before the detection of the CMB
anisotropies, and have played a signiﬁcant role in deﬁning
ΛCDM (Efstathiou et al., 1990). The next two decades will
see rapid progress in the ﬁeld of Large Scale Structure (LSS)
surveys with the advent of the Euclid Satellite (Laureijs et al.,
2011a), the Large Synoptic Survey Telescope (LSST, LSST
Science Collaboration & et al. 2009) and the Dark Energy
Spectroscopic Instrument (DESI, DESI Collaboration et al.
2016) which will create large scale maps of the Universe.
In particular they will use measurements of the angular
positions and redshifts of galaxies to infer the matter power
spectrum, facilitating measurements of Baryonic Acoustic
Oscillations (BAOs) and Redshift Space Distortions (RSDs),
and measurements of cosmic shear power spectrum by
estimation of galaxy shapes. There are many challenges in
achieving the fantastic levels of statistical precision which
will be possible with these instruments, notably reducing
the levels of observational systematic errors.
The Square Kilometre Array1 (SKA) is an international
project to build a next generation radio observatory which
will ultimately have a collecting area of 106 m2, i.e. the
collecting area necessary to detect the neutral hydrogen
(HI) emission at 21cm from an L∗galaxy at z ∼1 in a few
hours (Wilkinson, 1991). The SKA will comprise of two tele-
scopes: a dish array (SKA-MID) based in the Northern Cape
province of South Africa, and an array of dipole antennas
(SKA-LOW) based near Geraldton in Western Australia, with
the international headquarters on the Jodrell Bank Obser-
vatory Site in the United Kingdom. There will be two phases
to the project dubbed SKA1 and SKA2 with a cost cap of
∼675 MEuros being set for the SKA1. Only when SKA2 is
built will the SKA live up to its name.
The science case for the SKA has been presented in some
detail in two volumes produced in 2015 (Braun et al., 2015),
with 18 separate chapters presenting the cosmology science
case for the SKA (see Maartens et al. 2015 for the overview
chapter). The aim of this Red Book is to present the status
of this science case, with updated forecasts based on the
now agreed instrumental design of SKA1, to the cosmology
community and beyond. We will not attempt to make de-
tailed forecasts for SKA2 since its precise conﬁguration is
1https://www.skatelescope.org

--- PAGE BREAK ---

yet to be decided; sufﬁce to say that it will have a signiﬁcant
impact on cosmology when it comes online. Furthermore,
this is not intended to be a complete review of the subject
area, rather it is a summary of the main science goals. We
refer the reader to the individual papers for many of the
details of the individual science cases.
The observations we will focus on here are:
• Continuum emission largely due to synchrotron emis-
sion from electrons moving in the magnetic ﬁeld of
galaxies. Selecting galaxies in this way will allow the
measurements of the positions and shapes of galaxies.
• Line emission due to the spin-ﬂip transition between
the hyperﬁne states of neutral hydrogen (HI) at 21cm.
Using the redshifted HI line, it is possible to perform
spectroscopic galaxy redshift surveys and also to use a
new technique called Intensity Mapping (IM) whereby
one measures the large-scale correlations in the HI
brightness temperature without detecting individual
galaxies.
Note that it should be possible to perform continuum and
line surveys at the same time and that it may be possible to
use the line emission of the galaxies to deduce redshifts, at
least statistically, for the continuum galaxy samples2.
We have already pointed out that the next generation
of LSS surveys such as those made by Euclid, LSST and
DESI could suffer from observational systematics. The ad-
dition of radio observations by the SKA could be crucial to
achieving their ultimate goals, as cross-correlating the dis-
tribution and shapes of galaxies in two different wavebands
will heavily suppress systematic effects. This is because one
only expects weak correlations between the contaminants
in the different wavebands. Furthermore, additional wave-
bands can lead to a host of other synergies, a topic we will
return to in the discussion section.
2 COSMOLOGICAL SURVEYS WITH SKA1
In this section we will present the speciﬁcations of SKA1
telescopes required for forecasting cosmological parame-
ters, adopting the SKA1 Design Baseline in accordance with
SKA-TEL-SKO-00008183 (Anticipated SKA1 Science Perfor-
mance). In addition we will deﬁne the ﬁducial cosmological
model.
2.1 SKA1-MID
SKA1-MID will be a dish array consisting of a set of sub-
arrays. The ﬁrst is the South African SKA precursor MeerKAT
which has 64 13.5 m diameter dishes which will be supple-
mented by 133 SKA1 dishes with 15 m diameter. These
2Furthermore, the same surveys are compatible with the aims of many
of the other science goals of the SKA related to extragalactic astronomy
including understanding star formation and galaxy evolution, cosmic
magnetism and neutral hydrogen in galaxies.
3To be found under https://astronomers.skatelescope.org/documents/
Table 1 Summary of the array properties of SKA1-MID which will
comprise purpose-built SKA dishes and those from the South
African precursor instrument, MeerKAT.
SKA dishes
SKA dish diameter
15 m
MeerKAT dishes
MeerKAT dish diameter
13.5 m
Maximum Baseline
150 km
Resolution at 1.4 GHz
0.3 arcsec
Table 2 Receiver bands on SKA1-MID. Included also is the range of
redshift these receiver bands will probe using the 21 cm spectral
line.
Band
ν/GHz
z range
0.35-1.05
0.35-3
0.95-1.75
0-0.5
1.65-3
3-5.2
4.6-15.8
will be conﬁgured with a compact core and three log-
arithmically spaced spiral arms with a maximum base-
line of 150km which corresponds to an angular resolution
∼0.3arcsecs at frequency of 1.4GHz. The details of the tele-
scope conﬁguration are presented in Table 1. It is planned
that ultimately these dishes will be equipped with receivers
sensitive to 5 different frequency ranges or bands. The fre-
quency ranges and, where appropriate, the redshift range
for HI line observations are tabulated in Table 24. In the
present SKA baseline conﬁguration there are only sufﬁcient
funds to deploy Bands 1 and 2, which are most relevant to
cosmology, and Band 5.
The overall system temperature for the SKA1-MID array
can be calculated using
Tsys = Trx +Tspl +TCMB +Tgal ,
where we have ignored contributions from the atmosphere.
Tspl ≈3K is the contribution from spill-over, TCMB ≈2.73K
is the temperature of the CMB, Tgal ≈25K(408MHz/f )2.75
is the contribution of our own galaxy at frequency f and Trx
is the receiver noise temperature. In Band 1 we will assume
Trx = 15K+30K
GHz −0.75
and in Band 2 Trx = 7.5K.
4The situation is somewhat complicated by the fact that the relevant
MeerKAT bands do not have the same boundaries as the SKA Bands 1 and
2. They are: the UHF band 580 −1015MHz (0.4 < z < 1.45) and L-band
900−1670MHz (0 < z < 0.58). The table only refers to the SKA dishes.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2.2 SKA1-LOW
The SKA1-LOW interferometer array will consist of 512 sta-
tions, each containing 256 dipole antennas observing in
one band at 0.05GHz < ν < 0.35GHz. Most of the large-
scale sensitivity comes from the tightly packed “core" con-
ﬁguration of the array with Nd = 224 stations, however the
long baselines will be crucial for calibration and foreground
removal. We assume that the core stations are uniformly
distributed out to a 500 m radius, giving a maximum base-
line Dmax = 1km. The station size is D = 40m, the area
per antenna is 3.2m2 at 110 MHz, and the instantaneous
ﬁeld of view is (1.2λ/D)2 sr, with λ = 21(1+z)cm. Although
multi-beaming should be possible, we consider the con-
servative case of one beam only. The system temperature
is given by Tsys = Trx +Tgal, with the receiver temperature
Trx = 0.1Tgal +40K, and Tgal deﬁned as for SKA-MID.
2.3 Proposed cosmology surveys
In this document we will refer to the following surveys tar-
geting cosmology with the SKA:
• Medium-Deep Band 2 Survey : SKA1-MID in Band 2
covering 5,000deg2 and an integration time of approx-
imately ttot = 10,000 hrs on sky. Main goals: a contin-
uum weak lensing survey and an HI galaxy redshift
survey out to z ∼0.4 (see sections 3.2 and 4).
• Wide Band 1 Survey : SKA1-MID in Band 1 covering
20,000deg2 and an integration time of approximately
ttot = 10,000 hrs on sky. Main goals: a wide continuum
galaxy survey and HI intensity mapping in the redshift
range z = 0.35−3 (see sections 3.3, 3.4 and 5).
• Deep SKA1-LOW Survey : This survey will naturally
follow the Epoch of Reionisation (EoR) survey strat-
egy. Currently, a three-tier survey consisting of a wide-
shallow, a medium-deep, and a deep survey is planned.
For our forecasts in this paper we have assumed a
deep-like survey with 100deg2 sky coverage and an
integration time of approximately ttot = 5,000 hrs
on sky using data from sub-bands at frequencies
200−350MHz, equivalent to 3 < z < 6 (see section 5).
2.4 Survey Processing Requirements
The production of SKA data products will be performed by
the Science Data Processor (SDP) element through High
Performance Computer facilities at Perth and Cape Town
for SKA1-LOW and SKA1-MID respectively. The SKA1 De-
sign Baseline for the telescope will deliver a compute power
of 260 PFLOPs to deliver the science data products that will
be transported to Regional Data Centres for further analysis.
However, in order to meet the overall telescope cost cap a
Deployment Baseline has been deﬁned which will deliver
only 50 PFLOPs of compute power when telescope opera-
tions start, with a plan to increase to the full capability then
being delivered over a 5-year period. Although it is already
planned that scientiﬁc programmes will be scheduled to
spread the computational load across a period deﬁned by
the SDP ingest buffer, here we assess the computational
load that will result from the surveys deﬁned in section 2.3.
This assessment is based upon document SKA-TEL-SKO-
00009415 (Anticipated SKA1 HPC Requirements).
Medium-Deep Band 2 Survey: This survey will require
approximately 2 hours of observing time on each individ-
ual ﬁeld. Since the survey is assumed to be commensal
with the project to create and an all sky rotation measure
map to probe the galactic magnetic ﬁeld, data products
for all 4 polarisations will be required. The weak lensing
experiment (section 3.2) requires use of the longest base-
lines (150km). The HI galaxy redshift survey requires that
spectral line data products are generated in addition to
the continuum ones needed for other purposes. Although
combining these various requirements would seem to im-
ply a maximally difﬁcult data processing task, one of the
key ﬁndings of SKA-TEL-SKO-0000941 is that the dominant
computational cost is driven by the calibration step and
that after this has been achieved the delivery of multiple
different science products to address their differing require-
ments at minimal incremental cost. Assuming that obser-
vations are only required in sub-band Mid sb4 (as deﬁned
in SKA-TEL-SKO-0000941) we therefore estimate that the
computational cost of this experiment is approximately 75
PFLOPs (assuming 10% efﬁciency). While sb4 observations
are sufﬁcient for most continuum science goals, note that
this would only cover z > 0.2 for HI galaxy surveys, and
additional sb5 observations doubling the computational
cost might be necessary.
Wide Band 1 Survey: The primary data products required
for the HI IM experiment (section 5) are the antenna auto-
correlations, potentially complemented with additional cal-
ibration derived from the shortest interferometer baselines.
The compute power needed for processing autocorrelation
data is negligible compared with that for visibility data. This
survey will also be used to generate the Band 1 continuum
source sample discussed in section 3. The total observing
time on each individual ﬁeld is around 1 hour, so the anal-
ysis in SKA-TEL-SKO-0000941 suggests that the computa-
tional cost of this survey is approximately 50 PFLOPs (as-
suming 10% efﬁciency) for each of the three sub-bands in
Band 1 that are desired. However, as discussed in section 5,
in order to beat down systematic errors on the autocor-
relation measurements, a fast scanning strategy may be
adopted for this survey. Commensality with the continuum
survey will then require an on-the-ﬂy observing mode for
the interferometer6. Although it seems technically feasible
to implement such mode with SKA1-MID up to scanning
speeds of 1 deg/s, further assessments are still needed on
the calibration requirements for the continuum survey and
on the extra computational costs.
5To be found under https://astronomers.skatelescope.org/documents/
6Such observing mode is currently available with the VLA

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Deep SKA1-LOW Survey: This survey consists of more
than 1000 hour integrations on a small number of indi-
vidual ﬁelds with observations being commensal with the
EoR Key Science Project (KSP). The computational load of
calibrating such deep observations is severe, but is also a
strong function of frequency across the SKA1-LOW band,
with 200-350 MHz being substantially easier than 50-200
MHz. Although the signal of interest resides on the short-
est baselines, it is likely that high angular resolution image
data products will be required in order to remove the ef-
fects of contamination of discrete radio sources in the ﬁeld,
so we assume that baselines out to 65km will need to be
processed. We therefore estimate that the computational
load for the 200-350 MHz survey is approximately 130 and
70 PFLOPs (assuming 10% efﬁciency) for sub-bands LOW
sb5 and sb6. It should be noted that if these observations
are performed commensally with the EoR, the requirement
for the Low sb 1,2,3,4 data are approximately 200, 300, 200
and 200 PFLOPs (assuming 10% efﬁciency) respectively.
In conclusion, if balanced against other projects with low
computational demands such as the pulsar search and tim-
ing, then both the Medium-Deep Band 2 Survey should be
feasible to conduct even with the reduced capability offered
by the Deployment Baseline. The Wide intensity mapping
survey by itself will not be constrained by computational de-
mands, but commensality with the Wide continuum source
survey requires further assessments depending on the scan-
ning strategy. Observing a single sub-band of the Wide Band
1 Survey should be feasible with the initial HPC capability,
but processing all three sub-bands simultaneously will be
challenging until the HPC capability increases. The Deep
SKA1-LOW Survey will be more problematic and may need
to wait until the HPC capability increases. A caveat to this is
that the EoR observing is planned to be conducted in only
the best ionospheric conditions, or approximately 15% of
the total available time, so potentially this work can start
before the full Design Baseline capability is realised.
2.5 Synergies with other surveys
SKA cosmology will greatly beneﬁt from synergies with op-
tical surveys. Throughout this paper we refer to the clas-
siﬁcation of surveys in the report of the Dark Energy Task
Force (DETF, Albrecht et al. 2009), which describes dark
energy research developing in stages. Stage III comprises
current and near-term projects, which improve the dark
energy ﬁgure of merit by at least a factor of 3 over previous
measurements; representatives of cosmic shear and galaxy
clustering Stage III DETF experiments are, respectively, the
Dark Energy Survey (DES) and SDSS Baryon Oscillation
Spectroscopic Survey (BOSS). It is also customary to cate-
gorize Phase 1 of the SKA as Stage III. Stage IV experiments
increase the dark energy ﬁgure of merit by at least a factor
of 10 over previous measurements; Euclid, LSST and the full
SKA stand as Stage IV observational campaigns. In the fol-
lowing, we outline various optical experiments suggested
for synergies with the SKA1 throughout this document.
The Stage III Dark Energy Survey (DES) explores the cos-
mic acceleration via four distinct cosmological probes: type
Ia supernovae, galaxy clusters, Baryon Acoustic Oscillations,
and weak gravitational lensing. Over a 5 year programme it
is covering 5,000deg2 in the Southern hemisphere, with a
median redshift z ≈0.7 (Dark Energy Survey Collaboration
et al., 2016).
DESI (Dark Energy Spectroscopic Instrument) is a Stage
IV ground-based spectroscopic survey with 14,000 deg2 sky
coverage (Aghamousa et al., 2016). It will use a number of
tracers of the underlying dark matter ﬁeld: luminous red
galaxies (LRGs) up to z = 1; emission line galaxies (ELGs)
up to z = 1.7; and quasars and Ly-α features up to z = 3.5.
It plans to measure around 30 million galaxy and quasar
redshifts and obtain extremely precise measurements of
the Baryon Acoustic Oscillation features and matter power
spectrum in order to constrain dark energy and gravity, as
well as inﬂation and massive neutrinos.
The Euclid satellite is a European Space Agency’s
medium class astronomy and astrophysics space mission.
It comprises of two different instruments: a high quality
panoramic visible imager (VIS); and a near infrared 3-ﬁlter
(Y, J and H) photometer (NISP-P) together with a slitless
spectrograph (NISP-S) (see Markovic et al. (2017) for details
on the survey strategy). With these instruments, Euclid will
probe the expansion history of the Universe and the evolu-
tion of cosmic structures, by measuring the modiﬁcation of
shapes of galaxies induced by gravitational lensing, and the
three-dimensional distribution of structures from spectro-
scopic redshifts of galaxies and clusters of galaxies (Laureijs
et al., 2011b; Amendola et al., 2013, 2018)
The Large Synoptic Survey Telescope (LSST) is a forth-
coming ground based, wide ﬁeld survey telescope. It will
examine several probes of dark energy, including weak lens-
ing tomography and baryon acoustic oscillations. The LSST
survey will cover 18,000deg2, with a number density of
galaxies 40arcmin−2, redshift range 0 < z < 2 with median
redshift z ≈1 (LSST Dark Energy Science Collaboration,
2012).7
2.6 Fiducial cosmological model and extensions
The standard cosmological model that we have used is
a ΛCDM model based on the the parameters preferred
by the 2015 Planck analysis (TTTEEE+lowP) . In particu-
lar the physical baryon and cold dark matter (CDM) den-
sities are Ωbh2 = 0.02225 and Ωch2 = 0.1198, the value
of the Hubble constant is H0 = 100h kmsec−1 Mpc−1 =
67.27kmsec−1 Mpc−1, the amplitude and spectral index of
density ﬂuctuations are given by log(AS) = 3.094 and nS =
0.9645, and the optical depth to reionisation is τ = 0.079.
7Note that these numbers, used also in forecasts in the present
work, have recently been updated to more conservative values, such as
14,300deg2 for the area, and smaller number densities and median red-
shift (Alonso et al., 2018).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

We note that these parameter constraints were derived un-
der the assumption that the sum of the neutrino masses
is ﬁxed to Pmν = 0.06eV and therefore we use this in the
deﬁnition of our ﬁducial model.
We also consider extensions to the standard model, fo-
cusing on those where addition of information from SKA1
can have an impact. Speciﬁcally we will consider the follow-
ing possibilities.
• Curvature: parameterized by Ωk.
• Massive neutrinos: parameterized by the sum of the
masses Mν = Pmν.
• Modiﬁcations to the dark sector equation of state: us-
ing the CPL parameterization (Chevallier & Polarski,
2001), P/ρ = w(a) = w0 +(1−a)wa.
• Modiﬁed gravity: deviations from General Relativity
(GR) can be encoded by an effective description of the
relation between the metric potentials of the form
−2k2Ψ = 8πGN a2µ(a,k)ρ∆,
Ψ = γ(a,k),
where the GR limit is µ = γ = 1 and ∆is the comoving
density perturbation. We consider scale independent
deviations from GR which emerge at late times (we
neglect the effect at z > 5), hence we assume they are
proportional to the dark energy density parameter:
µ(a,k) = 1+µ0
ΩΛ(a)
ΩΛ,0
γ(a,k) = 1+γ0
ΩΛ(a)
ΩΛ,0
. (5)
µ0 and γ0 are the free parameters in our analysis.
• Non-Gaussianity: this is parameterised using the local
fNL deﬁned in terms of the amplitude of the quadratic
contributions to the metric potential Φ as a local func-
tion of a single Gaussian ﬁeld φ,
Φ(x) = φ(x)+ fNL
φ2(x)−〈φ2〉
+... .
At various stages during the analysis we have imposed a
Planck prior on our forecast cosmological parameter con-
straints. Unless stated otherwise, this is based on the Planck
2015 CMB + BAO + lensing results presented in Planck Col-
laboration et al. (2016a). This was implemented by taking
published MCMC chains8 and calculating the covariance
matrix for the following extended set of cosmological pa-
rameters: ns, σ8, Ωbh2, Ωmh2, h, w0, and wa. The covari-
ance matrix was then inverted to obtain an effective Fisher
matrix for the prior, which is marginalised over all other
parameters (including nuisance parameters) that were in-
cluded in the Planck analysis. Applying the prior is then
simply a matter of adding it to the forecast Fisher matrix
for the survey of interest. While this method is approximate
(e.g. it discards non-Gaussian information from the Planck
posterior), it is sufﬁciently accurate for forecasting.
8base_w_wa_plikHM_TT_lowTEB_BAO_post_lensing
Figure 1. The total and number of each galaxy species as function of
redshift N(z) for a 5,000deg2 survey (above) and a 20,000deg2 survey (be-
low) on SKA1-MID, assuming a ﬂux limit of 8.2µJy (for the Medium-Deep
Band 2 Survey) and 22.8µJy (for the Wide Band 1 Survey), both assuming
10σ detection. The galaxy types are star forming galaxy (SFG), starburst
(SB), Fanaroff-Riley type-I and type-II radio galaxies (FR1 & FR2), and
radio-quiet quasars (RQQ).
3 CONTINUUM GALAXY SURVEYS
3.1 Modeling the continuum sky
In this section, we outline how to model the continuum
sky and the science cases for the Wide Band 1 Survey and
Medium-Deep Band 2 Survey. The continuum ﬂux density
limit of the Medium-Deep Band 2 Survey is estimated to be
8.2µJy assuming a 10σ r.m.s. detection threshold whereas
the Wide Band 1 Survey will cover four times the area,
to approximately slightly less than half the depth and the
ﬂux density limit is predicted to be more than double the
Medium-Deep Band 2 Survey, at 22.8µJy assuming a 10σ
r.m.s. detection threshold. Note that this is not exactly a
factor of two different to that for the Medium-Deep Band 2
Surveysince the overall sensitivity of the array varies with
frequency.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Figure 2. Bias as a function of redshift for the different source types, as
following the simulated S3 catalogues of Wilman et al. (2008) including
the cut-off above some redshift as described in the text.
In Fig. 1 we plot the expected number distribution as a
function of redshift of all radio galaxies as well as split by
galaxy type, for the two different surveys in the top and bot-
tom panel respectively. These distributions are generated
using the SKA Simulated Skies (S3) simulations9, based on
Wilman et al. (2008).
We also need to choose a model for the galaxy bias. Each
of the species of source (i.e. starburst, star-forming galaxy,
FRI-type radio galaxy, etc.) from the S3 simulation has a
different bias model, as described in Wilman et al. (2008).
The bias in these models increases continuously with red-
shift, which is unphysical at high redshift; to avoid this we
follow the approach of Raccanelli et al. (2011) holding the
bias constant above a cut-off redshift (see Fig. 2). Having
a handle on the redshift evolution of bias and structure
will represent a strong improvement for radio continuum
galaxy surveys, thanks to the high-redshift tail of contin-
uum sources and will translate into tighter constraints on
dark energy parameters compared to the unbinned case, as
shown in Camera et al. (2012). The true nature of the bias
for high-redshift, low-luminosity radio galaxies, remains
currently unknown; the choice of a bias model therefore
remains a source of uncertainty, but one that the SKA will
be able to resolve.
As well as predicting the number and bias of the galaxies
for the two strategies, we also use the ﬂuxes from the S3
simulation to predict values for the slope of the source-ﬂux
to number density power law, which couples the observed
number density to the magniﬁcation (magniﬁcation bias),
given by
αmag(S) = −d(logn)
d(logS) ,
where S is the ﬂux density and n is the unmagniﬁed num-
9http://s-cubed.physics.ox.ac.uk/
zmin
zmax
N/106
bias
αmag
Wide Band 1 Survey
17.53
0.94
0.95
23.98
1.26
1.31
22.80
1.85
1.48
13.20
2.26
1.34
20.30
3.72
1.26
Total
97.81
Medium-Deep Band 2 Survey
4.14
0.86
0.76
6.25
0.86
1.04
8.06
0.90
1.05
7.78
1.21
1.19
7.85
1.52
1.30
5.77
1.58
1.22
4.54
2.09
1.46
7.90
2.39
1.25
6.12
2.85
1.25
Total
58.41
Table 3 For each redshift bins used in our analysis we present
the redshift range, expected number of galaxies, galaxy bias, and
magniﬁcation bias (αmag), for the two continuum surveys. The
bias refers to the number-weighted average of the bias of all galax-
ies in the bin. These surveys are expected to have a total angular
number density n ≈1.4arcmin−2 for the Wide Band 1 Survey and
≈3.2arcmin−2 for the Medium-Deep Band 2 Survey.
ber density (Bartelmann & Schneider, 2001). Magniﬁcation
bias arises because faint objects are more likely to be seen
if they are magniﬁed by gravitational lenses due to overden-
sities along the line of sight. This changes the clustering
properties of the sample, and thus contains cosmological
information.
Finally, we will be able to divide our sample into red-
shift bins, based on photometric or statistical information
(Kovetz et al., 2017b; Harrison et al., 2017). While these bins
will not be as accurate as spectroscopic redshifts, they will
still allow us to recover some of the 3D information from
the distribution of galaxies. The Medium-Deep Band 2 Sur-
vey will have cross-identiﬁcations from other wave-bands
(optical from the Dark Energy Survey, for example) over
its smaller area, allowing for accurate photometric redshift
bins, whereas the Wide Band 1 Survey will have limited all
sky optical/IR information. We assume nine photo-z bins
for Medium-Deep Band 2 Survey, and ﬁve for Wide Band
1 Survey. The assumed redshift bin distribution, as well as
the number of galaxies, bias and slope of the source count
power-law, is given in Table 3.
3.2 Weak lensing
A statistical measurement of the shapes of millions of galax-
ies as a function of sky position and redshift enables us to
measure the gravitational lensing effect of all matter - dark

--- PAGE BREAK ---

and baryonic - along the line of sight between us and those
galaxies. Weak lensing shear measurements are insensitive
to factors such as galaxy bias. A number of studies have
made marginal detections of the radio weak lensing signal
(Chang et al., 2004) and radio-optical cross correlation sig-
nals (Demetroullas & Brown, 2016, 2018), but convincing
detections have not yet been possible due to a lack of high
number densities of resolved, high redshift sources (see
Patel et al., 2010; Tunbridge et al., 2016; Hillier et al., 2018).
Here, we demonstrate the capabilities of SKA1 as a weak
lensing experiment, both alone and in cross-correlation
with optical lensing experiments. We consider only a total
intensity continuum lensing survey, but note that useful
information could also be gained on the important intrin-
sic alignment astrophysical systematic by using polarisa-
tion (Brown & Battye, 2010, 2011; Thomas et al., 2017) and
resolved rotational velocity (e.g. Morales, 2006) measure-
ments.
3.2.1 Cosmic shear simulations for SKA
We create forecasts for the SKA1 Medium-Deep Band 2 Sur-
vey. This survey is very similar to the optimal observing
conﬁguration found from catalogue-level simulations in
Bonaldi et al. (2016). We assume the survey will use the
lower 1/3 of Band 2 and the weak lensing data will be
weighted to give an image plane point spread function (PSF)
width of 0.55arcsec, with the source population cut to in-
clude all sources which have ﬂux > 10σ and a size > 1.5×
the PSF size. These source populations are also rescaled, as
in Bonaldi et al. (2016), to more closely match more recent
data and the T-RECS simulation (Bonaldi et al., 2018). For
comparison to a similar Stage III optical weak lensing ex-
periment, and for use in shear cross-correlations, we take
the DES with expectations for the full 5-year survey. The
assumed parameters of the two surveys are fully speciﬁed
in Table 4. For the Medium-Deep Band 2 Survey we assume
a sensitivity corresponding to baseline weighting resulting
in an image plane PSF with a best-ﬁtting Gaussian FWHM
of 0.55arcsec.
We assume redshift distributions for weak lensing galax-
ies follow a distribution for the number density of the form
dz ∝z2 exp
−(z/z0)γ¢
where z0 = zm/
2 and zm is the median redshift of sources
using best ﬁtting parameters for the SKA1-MID Medium-
Deep Band 2 Survey population and DES survey given in
Table 4. Sources are split into ten tomographic redshift bins,
with equal numbers of sources in each bin and each source
is attributed an error as follows. A fraction fspec-z out to
a redshift of zspec-max are assumed to have spectroscopic
errors, in line with the predictions of Yahya et al. (2015);
Harrison et al. (2017). The remainder are given photometric
redshift errors with a Gaussian distribution (constrained
with the physical prior z > 0) of width (1+ z)σphoto-z out to
a redshift of zphoto-max. Beyond zphoto-max we assume very
poor redshift information, with (1+ z)σno-z.
Of crucial importance to weak lensing cosmology is pre-
cise, accurate measurement of source shapes in order to
infer the shear transformation resulting from gravitational
lensing. For our forecasts, we assume systematic errors due
to shear measurement will be sub-dominant to statistical
ones. For the Medium-Deep Band 2 Survey, the formulae of
Amara & Réfrégier (2008) allow us to calculate requirements
on the multiplicative shear bias of σm < 6.4×10−3 and ad-
ditive shear bias of σc < 8.0 × 10−4. These requirements
are of the same order of magnitude as those achieved in
current optical weak lensing surveys such as DES and the
Kilo-Degree Survey10, but tighter (by an order of magnitude
in the case of multiplicative bias) than current methods for
radio interferometer to date (Rivi & Miller, 2018; Rivi et al.,
2018). We assume that in the period to 2028, when obser-
vations are currently expected to begin, sufﬁcient progress
will be made in radio shear measurement methods such
that biases are comparable to those achievable in optical
surveys today. Previous work has shown this is highly un-
likely to be possible with images created with the CLE AN
algorithm (Högbom, 1974) meaning access to lower level
data products such as gridded visibilities (or equivalently
dirty images) will be essential (see also Patel et al., 2015;
Harrison & Brown, 2015). For the intrinsic ellipticity distri-
bution of galaxies we use a shape dispersion of σgi = 0.3.
There are signiﬁcant advantages to forming cosmic
shear power spectra by cross-correlating shear maps made
using two different experiments. In such power spectra,
wavelength-dependent additive and multiplicative system-
atics can be removed (Camera et al., 2017) and almost all of
the statistical constraining power on cosmological parame-
ters is retained (Harrison et al., 2016). Care must be taken
in identifying the noise power spectra in the case of cross-
power spectra; it will be affected by the overlap in shape
information between cross-experiment bins. We note that
constraints are relatively insensitive to the number of galax-
ies which are present in both bins, being degraded by only
4% when the fraction of overlap is varied between zero and
one (see Harrison et al., 2016, Fig. 1).
3.2.2 Results from autocorrelation
We show forecast constraints in three cosmological param-
eter spaces in Fig. 3: matter (Ωm-σ8), Dark Energy equation
of state in the CPL parameterisation (w0-wa) and modiﬁed
gravity modiﬁcations to the Poisson equation and Gravita-
tional slip (µ0-γ0). Our results show that the SKA1 Medium-
Deep Band 2 Survey will be capable of comparable con-
straints to other DETF Stage III surveys such as DES and
also, powerfully, that cross-correlation constraints (which
are free of wavelength-dependent systematics) retain al-
most all of the statistical power of the individual experi-
ments. In Fig. 4 we also present forecast constraints in the
10http://kids.strw.leidenuniv.nl

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Weak lensing
Asky
fspec-z
zspec-max
σphoto-z
zphoto-max
σno-z
experiment
[deg2]
[arcmin−2]
SKA1 Medium-Deep
5,000
1.25
0.15
0.05
5,000
0.05
Table 4 Parameters used in the creation of simulated weak lensing data sets for SKA1 Medium-Deep Band 2 Survey and DES 5-year
survey considered in this section.
Figure 3. Forecast constraints for weak lensing with the SKA1 Medium-
Deep Band 2 Survey as speciﬁed in the text, compared to the Stage III
optical weak lensing DES and including cross-correlation constraints.
Figure 4. The effect of including a prior from the Planck satellite (Planck
2015 CMB + BAO + lensing as described in section 2.6) on the forecast
Dark Energy constraints for the speciﬁed cross-correlation weak lensing
experiment (note that constraints in the other two parameter spaces on
not signiﬁcantly affected).
Dark Energy parameter space including priors from the
Planck CMB experiment, speciﬁcally a Gaussian approxi-
mation to the Planck 2015 CMB + BAO + lensing likelihood
as described in section 2.6 with constraints on the other
parameters considered not signiﬁcantly affected by appli-
cation of the Planck prior. We also display tabulated sum-
maries of the one dimensional marginalised uncertainties
on these parameters in Table 5.
3.2.3 Results from radio-optical cosmic shear
cross-correlations
A key consideration in weak lensing surveys are the sys-
tematics induced by the instrument on galaxy shape mea-
surements, which must be controlled to high levels in order
to ensure unbiased constraints on cosmological parame-
ters. In contrast with the optical weak lensing surveys con-
ducted to date, radio weak lensing surveys will measure
galaxy shapes from uv-data, allowing for direct Fourier
plane measurement, as well as measurement in images
reconstructed by deconvolving the interferometer PSF. The
systematics from these shape measurements will be very
different, and uncorrelated with, those from measuring
shapes from CCD images. In Rivi & Miller (2018), the au-
thors adapted the optical method lensﬁt to shape measure-
ment on Fourier-domain interferometer data which is ca-
pable of satisfying the requirements for the SKA1 Medium-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Experiment
σ(Ωm)/Ωm,
σ(σ8)/σ8
σ(w0),
σ(wa)
σ(µ0),
σ(γ0)
DETF FoM
SKA1-Medium-deep
0.083
0.040
0.52
0.77
0.63
SKA1-Medium-deep + Planck
0.084
0.040
0.28
0.43
0.056
0.032
0.43
0.64
0.52
DES + Planck
0.058
0.033
0.22
0.33
SKA1-Medium-deep×DES
0.046
0.024
0.45
0.59
0.48
SKA1-Medium-deep×DES + Planck
0.046
0.024
0.23
0.36
Table 5 One dimensional marginalised constraints, from weak lensing alone and in combination with Planck CMB (PlanckCMB2015 +
BAO + lensing as described in section 2.6), on the parameters considered, where all pairs (indicated by brackets) are also marginalised
over the base ΛCDM parameter set.
Figure 5. Weak lensing marginal joint 1σ error contours in the dark energy
equation-of-state parameter plane with additive (left) and multiplicative
(right) systematics on the shear power spectrum measurement. The black
cross indicates the ΛCDM ﬁducial values for dark energy parameters. Blue,
red and green ellipses are for radio and optical/near-IR surveys and their
cross-correlation, respectively. (Details in the text.)
Deep Band 2 Survey on sources with SNR > 18. Residual
systematics are typically modelled as linear in the shear and
shear power spectrum, with an additive and multiplicative
component. In Fig. 3 (and Harrison et al., 2016) the unﬁlled
black contours show the constraints from cross-correlating
radio and optical weak lensing experiments, demonstrat-
ing that nearly all of the statistical constraining power re-
mains. In Fig. 5 (and Camera et al., 2017) we show explicitly
how multi-wavelength cosmic shear analyses measuring
the dark energy equation of state parameters {w0,wa} can
be made free of both additive and multiplicative system-
atics. The left panel shows how cross-correlation of radio
and optical (green) experiments directly removes additive
systematics in both radio-radio (blue) and optical-optical
(red) experiments. Solid, dashed, dash-dotted and dotted
ellipses represent increasing values for the residual system-
atics power spectrum. Also in the right panel of Fig. 5 we
show constraints for systematics which are multiplicative
on shear power spectrum measurements. Here the radio-
radio, optical-optical and radio-optical measurements are
all biased away from the input cosmology individually, but
may be used in self-calibration to recover it correctly. Miti-
gation of such multiplicative systematics is expected to be
extremely important even at the level of Stage III surveys
and represents a powerful argument for performing weak
lensing in the radio band.
3.3 Angular Correlation Function and Integrated
Sachs Wolfe Effect
The angular distribution of galaxies and the cross-
correlation of the galaxy positions with other tracers can
yield important cosmological tests. The two-point distri-
bution of radio galaxy positions in angle space can be rep-
resented by the angular correlation power spectrum C i,j
where ℓis the multipole number and i, j label redshift bins
with the galaxies distributed across these bins deﬁned by
window functions, Wi(z). This statistic encodes the den-
sity distribution projected on to the sphere of the sky, and
so smooths over structure along the line of sight. This can
dampen the effect of Redshift Space Distortions (RSDs) on
the angular power spectrum for broad redshift distribu-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

tions, but these can become important as the distributions
narrow (Padmanabhan et al., 2007).
When two non-overlapping redshift bins are consid-
ered the cross-correlation of density perturbations between
these two bins measured through C i,j
will be negligible in
the absence of lensing. However, the observed galaxy dis-
tribution is also affected by gravitational lensing through
magniﬁcation, which can induce a correlation between the
two bins, creating an observed correlation between the po-
sitions of some high redshift galaxies and the distribution
of matter at low redshift.
The distribution of matter in the Universe can also
be measured by the effect on the CMB temperature
anisotropies, through the Integrated Sachs-Wolfe effect
(ISW), where the redshifting and blueshifting of CMB pho-
tons by the intervening gravitational potentials generates
an apparent change in temperature (Sachs & Wolfe, 1967).
Since the distribution of matter (which generates the grav-
itational potentials) can be mapped through the distribu-
tion of tracer particles, such as galaxies, the effect is de-
tected by cross-correlating the positions of galaxies and
temperature anisotropies on the sky. For a more detailed
description of the use of the ISW with SKA continuum sur-
veys, see Raccanelli et al. (2015).
Here, we demonstrate the capabilities of SKA for us-
ing the angular correlation function and relevant cross-
correlations as a cosmological probe.
3.3.1 Forecasting
In order to estimate the effectiveness of the surveys and
make predictions for the constraints on the cosmological
parameters, we simulate the auto- and cross-correlation
galaxy clustering angular power spectra, including the ef-
fects of cosmic magniﬁcation and the ISW. As only the ob-
served galaxy distributions (which are affected by gravita-
tional lensing) can be measured, it is impossible to mea-
sure the galaxy angular power spectrum decoupled from
magniﬁcation. Hence, the galaxy clustering angular power
spectrum contains both the density and magniﬁcation per-
turbations.
We use the simulated source count and galaxy bias model
from section 3.1 to simulate the angular correlation and
cross-correlation functions Cℓ, and the relevant measure-
ment covariance matrices, for the Wide Band 1 Survey and
Medium-Deep Band 2 Survey. In the case of galaxy clus-
tering and ISW, we limit the analysis to the multipoles
ℓmin ≤ℓ≤200, where ℓmin = π/(2fsky) and fsky is the frac-
tion of sky surveyed.
When making our forecasts, we also compare to and com-
bine with current constraints from Planck CMB 2015, BAO
and RSD observations, as described in 2.6 (with additional
relevant information for the extension parameters under
consideration). We also assume that the overall bias for a
particular redshift bin to be unknown, and so marginalised
over. As such there are ﬁve (or nine, depending on the num-
ber of photometric bins for the given survey) extra param-
eters being considered in the Fisher matrix, which will de-
grade the performance of these cosmological probes.
3.3.2 Results
The 68% conﬁdence level constraints on the different pa-
rameters described in section 2.6 for the Wide Band 1 Sur-
vey and the Medium-Deep Band 2 Survey are given Table 6.
We show the predicted 68% and 95% conﬁdence level
constraints as a 2D contour, for the dark energy parameters
w0 and wa in Fig. 6, and the modiﬁed gravity parameters µ0
and γ0 in Fig. 7. These constraints are shown for the Wide
Band 1 Survey and the Medium-Deep Band 2 Survey in red,
combining measurements from all photometric redshift
bins, and including constraints from the ISW. In the dark
energy case, we also show current constraints from Planck
in blue, but for the modiﬁed gravity case the Planck MCMC
chains for these models are not public.
The predicted constraints on the dark energy parameters
do not improve signiﬁcantly on those presently available.
This is also somewhat the case for the modiﬁed gravity
parameters and the curvature, in the case of the Medium-
Deep Band 2 Survey, though the Wide Band 1 Survey does
improve on current knowledge. However, such constraints
will improve with a better knowledge of the bias (decreasing
the number of extra parameters to be marginalised over)
and with a larger number of photometric redshift bins.
Constraints on fNL from the Medium-Deep Band 2 Sur-
vey will not be signiﬁcantly better than those currently
made by the Planck surveyor, fNL = 2.5±5.7 (Planck Collab-
oration et al., 2016b). In contrast the Wide Band 1 Survey is
capable of improving the constraint, with further potential
gain from an increased number of redshift bins (Raccanelli
et al., 2017). Finally, more competitive constraints on all pa-
rameters, but especially for fNL, may be achievable through
the use of different radio galaxy populations as tracers of dif-
ferent mass halos, as described in Ferramacho et al. (2014).
3.4 Cosmic dipole
The standard model of cosmology predicts that that the
radio sky should be isotropic on large scales. Deviations
from isotropy are expected to arise from proper motion
of the Solar system with respect to the isotropic CMB (the
cosmic dipole), the formation of large scale structures and
light propagation effects like gravitational lensing.
The CMB dipole is normally associated with the proper
motion of the Sun with respect to the cosmic heat bath at
T0 = 2.725K. However, the CMB dipole could also contain
other contributions, e.g. a primordial temperature dipole or
an integrated Sachs-Wolfe (ISW) effect, and measurements
using only CMB data are limited by cosmic variance.
The extragalactic radio sky offers an excellent opportu-
nity to perform an independent test of the origin of the
cosmic dipole. It is expected that the radio dipole is domi-
nated by the kinematic dipole, as radio continuum surveys
have median redshifts well above one (unlike visible or in-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Table 6 Predicted constraints from continuum galaxy clustering measurements using the two different survey strategies (Wide Band 1
Survey and Medium-Deep Band 2 Survey). These are 68% conﬁdence levels on each of the parameters of the four different cosmological
models we tested. The three main columns show results of galaxy clustering (GC) by itself (left), GC combined with Integrated Sachs
Wolfe (ISW) constraints (centre), and when Planck priors from Planck CMB 2015+BAO are added to GC+ISW (right). Note that these
cases assume that the overall bias in each of the photometric redshift bins is unknown, and needs to be marginalised over.
Data combination and parameters
Survey
Model
Galaxy Clustering (GC)
GC+ISW
GC+ISW+Planck
σ(w0)
σ(wa)
σ(w0)
σ(wa)
σ(w0)
σ(wa)
SKA1-Wide
(w0wa)CDM
0.29
0.79
SKA1-Medium-Deep
(w0wa)CDM
0.28
0.77
σ(µ0)
σ(γ0)
σ(µ0)
σ(γ0)
σ(µ0)
σ(γ0)
SKA1-Wide
ΛCDM+µ0+γ0
0.88
0.15
0.35
SKA1-Medium-Deep
ΛCDM+µ0+γ0
0.16
0.37
σ(Ωk)
σ(Ωk)
σ(Ωk)
SKA1-Wide
ΛCDM+Ωk
18×10−2
14×10−2
2.0×10−3
SKA1-Medium-Deep
ΛCDM+Ωk
12×10−2
12×10−2
2.0×10−3
σ(fNL)
σ(fNL)
σ(fNL)
SKA1-Wide
ΛCDM+fNL
SKA1-Medium-Deep
ΛCDM+fNL
frared surveys). Current estimates of the radio dipole show
good agreement with the CMB dipole direction, but ﬁnd
a dipole amplitude that is a factor of 2 to 5 larger than ex-
pected (Blake & Wall, 2002; Singal, 2011; Rubart & Schwarz,
2013; Colin et al., 2017; Bengaly et al., 2018b). See also Ben-
galy et al. (2018a) for a study on dipole measurements with
the SKA1 and SKA2.
3.4.1 Forecasting
In this section, we estimate the ability of SKA1 continuum
surveys to measure the cosmic radio dipole using realistic
mock catalogues, which include the effects of large scale
structure and the kinematic dipole. Details of that study
will be published elsewhere. Brieﬂy, the mock catalogues
assumed an angular power spectrum of the radio galaxies
generated by CAMB S O U R C E S (Challinor & Lewis, 2011),
assuming the Planck best-ﬁt ﬂat ΛCDM model (Planck
Collaboration et al., 2016a). The redshift distribution N(z)
is shown in Fig. 1, and the bias b(z) follows Alonso et al.
(2015c). The available sky area is fsky ≈0.52 due to the re-
moval of the galactic plane on low latitudes (|b| ≤10◦). Us-
ing the lognormal code F L A S K (Xavier et al., 2016), we pro-
duced ensembles of 100 catalogues each, where the radio
source positions follow the expected clustering distribu-
tion.
The effect of the kinetic dipole is implemented by boost-
ing the maps of galaxy number densities according to the
theoretical expectation (Ellis & Baldwin, 1984),
dΩ(S,n)
dΩ(S,n)
rest
1+[2+β(1+α)]n·v
where S denotes the ﬂux density threshold of the survey, n
the direction on the sky and v the Sun’s proper motion. This
expression assumes that radio sources follow a power-law
spectral energy distribution, S ∝ν−β with β = 0.75. The
source counts are assumed to scale with S as dn/dS ∝S−α,
and we assume α = 1 (which is very similar to the values of
α for the individual redshift bins from simulations given in
Table 3).
Here we show results from estimations of the radio dipole
direction and amplitude, A = [2+β(1+α)]|v|/c, of the gen-
erated mock catalogues by means of a quadratic estimator
in pixel space on a HEALPix11 grid with Nside = 64. Using
pixel space has the advantage that incomplete sky coverage
does not bias the results.
3.4.2 Results
Fig. 8 shows an example of a simulated sky for a ﬂux den-
sity threshold of 22.8µJy at a central frequency of 700 MHz
(Band 1), demonstrating the effect of the dipole on the
source counts, as the southern sky appears to be slightly
more dominated by blue than the northern hemisphere.
The results from a set of 100 such simulations is shown
in Fig. 9. Given the assumptions, we would expect our
mocks to produce a kinematic radio dipole amplitude of
A = 0.0046, pointing to the CMB dipole direction. The large
scale structure contributes a dipole with a mean amplitude
of A = 0.0031±0.0016. This prediction depends on the as-
sumed luminosity functions, spectral energy distributions,
bias, redshift and luminosity evolution of radio sources, see
e.g. Tiwari & Nusser (2016).
Fig. 9 shows the expected total radio dipole, which com-
prises contributions from large scale structure and the
proper motion of the solar system. The expected kinematic
contribution dominates the structure contribution and the
measured amplitude is A = 0.0056 ± 0.0017 in direction
11HEALPix package http://healpix.sourceforge.net/

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Wide
Planck+BAO
SKA+Planck+BAO
Medium-deep
Figure 6. 68% and 95% conﬁdence level forecast constraints on the devia-
tion of the dark energy parameters w0,wa from their ﬁducial values for
the Wide Band 1 Survey (top) and Medium-Deep Band 2 Survey (bottom),
using galaxy clustering data, including the effects of cosmic magniﬁcation.
We show constraints from Planck CMB 2015 and BAO and RSD observa-
tions, as described in 2.6 in blue, SKA1 forecasts in red and the constraints
for the combination of both experiments in green. We show here that for
the dark energy parameters, the continuum data adds little to the existing
constraints, owing to the uncertainty in the bias in each redshift bin.
Wide
SKA+Planck+BAO
Medium-deep
Figure 7. 68% and 95% conﬁdence level forecast constraints on the devia-
tion of the modiﬁed gravity parameters µ0,γ0 from their ﬁducial values for
the Wide Band 1 Survey (top) and Medium-Deep Band 2 Survey (bottom),
using galaxy clustering data, including the effects of cosmic magniﬁca-
tion. We show SKA forecasts constraints in red and the constraints for the
combination of SKA1 with Planck CMB 2016 and BAO in green.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Figure 8. Simulated source count per pixel for the SKA1-MID Wide Band 1
Survey at a central frequency of 700 MHz and a ﬂux threshold of 22.8µJy
in galactic coordinates and Mollweide projection at HEALPix resolution
Nside = 64 including the kinematic dipole and cosmic structure up to
multipole moment ℓmax = 128. This shows the effect of the dipole on the
source counts, as the southern sky appears here slightly bluer than the
northern hemisphere.
(l,b) = (263.5 ± 28.0,38.8 ± 19.7) deg. The distribution of
dipole directions from the mocks is centered on the CMB
dipole direction, but with some scatter due to the large
scale structure.
The structure dipole is in fact dominated by contribu-
tions from local structure. Removing the low-redshift struc-
ture dipole (z < 0.5), which might be possible using op-
tical or infra-red catalogues, or by means of the HI red-
shift measured by the SKA, we measure the dipole direction
(l,b) = (265.3±4.9,46.4±4.3) deg, in excellent agreement
with the simulated dipole direction, with an amplitude of
A = 0.0047±0.0004, also agreeing with the input value. The
distributions of dipole amplitudes is shown in the right
panel of Fig. 9.
We also simulated catalogues with S = 5,10 and 16µJy,
which show that the structure dipole depends on the ﬂux
density threshold, providing an extra handle to separate
them from the kinematic dipole. In none of our simulations
was shot noise a limitation, in contrast to contemporary
radio continuum surveys (Schwarz et al., 2015).
4 HI GALAXY REDSHIFT SURVEY
The HI galaxy redshift survey mode involves detecting the
redshifted 21cm emission from many individual galaxies
above the confusion limit, predominantly at low redshift
(z ≲0.4). At a minimum, the positions and spectroscopic
redshifts of the detected galaxies will be available. The 21cm
line widths and angular sizes of some subset of the galaxies
will also be measured, allowing direct estimates of pecu-
liar velocities to be made via the Tully-Fisher relation and
Doppler magniﬁcation effects respectively.
The galaxies detected in this survey mode will not neces-
sarily be well-resolved, but resolved detections can be used
to study galaxy dynamics. The variation of the HI content of
galaxies over cosmic time is also an important observable
for studies of galaxy formation and evolution. All galaxies
with a detectable 21cm line are expected to have strong
continuum detections, and so this survey is expected to be
carried out commensally with a continuum galaxy survey.
In fact, characterising the continuum emission along the
line of sight to HI-emitting galaxies may be a necessary step
in detecting the 21cm line.
In this section, we describe the properties of a HI galaxy
redshift survey using the SKA1 Medium-Deep Band 2 Sur-
vey , and the main cosmological applications of the result-
ing dataset.
4.1 Survey characteristics
The HI galaxy sample from the SKA1-MID Medium-Deep
Band 2 Survey will be sample variance-limited out to zmax ∼
0.4. It will be signiﬁcantly oversampled (i.e. n(z)P(k) ≫1
where here n(z) is the comoving number density of galaxies
in this context) at z ≲0.2, which provides an opportunity
for multi-tracer studies, in which the uncertainty on cer-
tain cosmological quantities is dominated by shot noise
rather than sample variance. Similarly, procedures such as
void detection will be more robust thanks to the high num-
ber density. Note that Band 1 is expected to yield too few
galaxies for a cosmological survey, but deep and narrow
surveys may be carried out in this band to characterise the
evolution of HI galaxies.
Basic predictions for the number density (and corre-
sponding bias) of galaxies that will be detected by a blind
SKA1 HI galaxy survey were made in Yahya et al. (2015) for
the original SKA1 speciﬁcations, and Camera et al. (2015a)
provided a companion ﬁtting function for the estimated
magniﬁcation bias. These calculations were based on the
S3-SAX simulations (Obreschkow & Rawlings, 2009), and
assumed that any galaxy with an integrated line ﬂux above
a given (linewidth-dependent) SNR threshold would be de-
tectable. This detection criterion implicitly assumes that a
matched ﬁlter has been applied to the sources (e.g. so the
total detected ﬂux of galaxies is taken into account, even
if it is spread across multiple resolution elements). Yahya
et al. (2015) also includes ﬁtting functions that can be used
to rescale the number density and bias for different instru-
mental speciﬁcations.
Updated number density and bias predictions for the
current SKA1 speciﬁcations were presented in Bull (2016),
and are reproduced in Table 7, using the following ﬁtting
functions:
10c1deg−2 zc2 exp(−c3z),
(10)
b(z)
c4 exp(c5z).
(11)
Redshift-binned numerical values of the number density
and bias are given in Table 8. Bull (2016) also included a
survey optimisation study to establish the optimal survey
area as a function of total survey time, ﬁnding that the Wide
Band 1 Survey would optimise the survey volume that is

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CMB dipole
structure dipole
kinematic &
structure dipole
kinematic &
structure dipole,
w/o local structure
kinetic dipole
0.000
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.010
0.012
dipole amplitude
counts
Figure 9. Dipole directions (left) and histogram of dipole amplitudes (right) based on 100 large scale structure simulations each for a ﬂux density threshold
of 22.8µJy at 700 MHz without kinetic dipole (pink), with kinetic dipole (purple) and with the contribution from the local structure dipole removed (red).
The blue dot shows the direction of the CMB dipole. The results are displayed in galactic coordinates and in stereographic projection.
Table 7 Fitting coefﬁcients for dn/dz and b(z) for a HI galaxy sample from the SKA1 Medium-Deep Band 2 Survey, for two detection
thresholds. zmax is the maximum redshift at which n(z)P(kNL) > 1, where kNL is the non-linear scale.
Survey
Thres.
zmax
Ngal/106
SKA1 Medium-Deep Band 2 Survey
5.450
1.310
14.394
0.616
1.017
0.391
3.49
4.939
1.027
14.125
0.913
-0.153
0.329
2.04
Table 8 Binned number density and bias of HI galaxies, and corre-
sponding ﬂux r.m.s. sensitivity, for the SKA1 Medium-Deep Band
2 Survey. The assumed detection threshold is 5σ.
zmin
zmax
n(z) [Mpc−3]
b(z)
Srms [µJy]
2.73×10−2
0.657
117.9
4.93×10−3
0.714
109.6
9.49×10−4
0.789
102.9
2.23×10−4
0.876
97.5
6.44×10−5
0.966
93.1
sample variance limited, while the Medium-Deep Band 2
Survey would provide a reasonable trade-off between total
volume and maximum redshift.
Alternative number density predictions were made in
Harrison et al. (2017), using a Bayesian line-ﬁtting method
on simulated spectra for continuum-selected galaxies (i.e.
a non-blind survey). The population of galaxies that is se-
lected by this method is quite different to those selected us-
ing the SNR threshold of Yahya et al. (2015) but, coinciden-
tally, the predicted number density curves are very similar.
Typically ∼10% of continuum galaxies (for the Medium-
Deep Band 2 Survey) will have signiﬁcant detections of the
21cm line using this method.
We note that bright RFI from navigation satellites is ex-
pected to impact our ability to detect HI galaxies in the
redshift range from approximately 0.09 ≲z ≲0.23, corre-
sponding to 1164 −1300 MHz. Terrestrial RFI is also ex-
pected to be present elsewhere in the band, but at a much
lower level thanks to the excellent radio-quietness of the
SKA1-MID site. Source detection algorithms can also incor-
porate features to reject RFI.
4.2 Cosmological probes
The primary purpose of spectroscopic galaxy redshift sur-
veys is generally to measure the 3D clustering of galaxies,
particularly the Baryon Acoustic Oscillation scale and Red-
shift Space Distortion features in the galaxy 2-point func-
tion, which we discuss below. Several other probes will be
supported by the HI galaxy survey, however, providing ad-
ditional information about galaxy velocities, weak lensing
convergence, and the distribution of cosmic voids. Each
of these will require alternative analysis pipelines to be de-
veloped, with the ability to measure marked correlation
functions, galaxy sizes, and 21cm line widths, in addition
to the usual 3D position information. While these probes
will not drive the survey optimization, they provide new
information that will enable a number of novel cosmolog-
ical analyses, and hence it is important to make sure that
they are accommodated in the survey speciﬁcations. It is
also important to ensure appropriate sky overlap with other
surveys that provide complementary information, such as
optical images (for lensing studies) and γ-ray maps (for
detecting dark matter annihilation in cross-correlation).
4.2.1 Baryon Acoustic Oscillations and Redshift Space
Distortions
The Baryon Acoustic Oscillation (BAO) feature is a preferred
scale in the clustering of galaxies, set by sound waves emit-
ted in the early Universe when photons and baryons were
coupled. Since the true physical scale of the BAO is known
from CMB observations, we can use the feature as a ‘stan-
dard ruler’ to measure the cosmological expansion rate and
distance-redshift relation. This is achieved by separately
measuring the apparent size of the BAO feature in the trans-
verse and radial directions on the sky, and comparing with
its known physical size (set by the size of the comoving

--- PAGE BREAK ---

SKA Wide (IM, Band 1)
SKA Medium-Deep (IM, Band 2)
SKA Medium-Deep (GS, Band 2)
Euclid-like (GS)
HETDEX (GS)
DA/DA
Figure 10. Forecast constraints on the cosmic expansion rate, H, (left panel) and angular diameter distance, D A(z), (right panel) for several different
experiments, following the forecasting methodology described in Bull (2016). The SKA1 Medium-Deep Band 2 Survey for HI galaxy redshifts is shown in
light blue, HI intensity mapping are shown in red/pink (see Sec. 5 for details), and optical/NIR spectroscopic galaxy surveys are shown in black/grey.
8)/(f
Figure 11. Forecast constraints on the linear growth rate of large-scale
structure, f σ8, for the same surveys as in Fig. 10. Open circles show a
compilation of current constraints on f σ8 from Macaulay et al. (2013).
sound horizon during the baryon drag epoch, rs(zd)). The
radial BAO scale is sensitive to the expansion rate, H(z),
while the transverse BAO scale is sensitive to the angular
diameter distance, D A(z).
The HI galaxy Medium-Deep Band 2 Survey will be able
to detect and measure the BAO feature at low redshift
(Yahya et al., 2015; Abdalla et al., 2015; Bull, 2016). This
measurement has already been performed by optical spec-
troscopic experiments, such as BOSS and WiggleZ (Alam
et al., 2017; Kazin et al., 2014), but over different redshift
ranges and patches of the sky. An SKA1 HI galaxy redshift
survey will add independent data points at low redshift,
z ≲0.3, which will help to better constrain the time evo-
lution of the energy density of the various components
of the Universe – particularly dark energy. The expected
constraints on H(z) and D A(z) are shown in Fig. 10, and
are typically a few percent for the HI galaxy survey. While
this is not competitive with the precision of forthcoming
optical/near-IR spectroscopic surveys such as DESI and
Euclid, it will be at lower redshift than these experiments
can access, and so is complementary to them.
Another feature that is present in the clustering pattern
of galaxies are Redshift Space Distortions (RSDs), a charac-
teristic squashing of the 2D correlation function caused by
the peculiar motions of galaxies (Kaiser, 1987; Scoccimarro,
2004; Percival et al., 2011). Galaxies with a component of
motion in the radial direction have their spectral line emis-
sion Doppler shifted, making them appear closer or further
away than they actually are according to their observed
redshifts. This results in an anisotropic clustering pattern
as seen in redshift space. The degree of anisotropy is con-
trolled by several factors, including the linear growth rate of
structure, f (z), and the clustering bias of the galaxies with
respect to the underlying cold dark matter distribution,
b(z). The growth rate in particular is valuable for testing
alternative theories of gravity, which tend to enhance or
suppress galaxy peculiar velocities with respect to the GR
prediction (Jain & Zhang, 2008; Baker et al., 2014). RSDs
occur on smaller scales than the BAO feature, but can also
be detected by an HI galaxy redshift survey as long as the
shot noise level is sufﬁciently low. The SKA1 HI galaxy sur-
vey will be able to measure the normalised linear growth
rate, f σ8, to ∼3% at z ≈0.3 (see Fig. 11). This is roughly in
line with what existing optical experiments can achieve at
similar redshifts (see Macaulay et al. (2013) for a summary).
Fig. 12 shows results for when the growth rate constraints
are mapped onto the phenomenological modiﬁed grav-
ity parametrisation deﬁned in Eqs. (3) and (4).12 The con-
12The results in Fig. 12 used the forecasting code and Planck prior de-
scribed in Raveri et al. (2016a,b).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Figure 12. Forecast constraints on phenomenological modiﬁed gravity
parameters using the broadband shape of the power spectrum, detected
using the HI galaxy sample of the Medium-Deep Band 2 Survey. Planck
and DES (galaxy clustering only) constraints are included for comparison.
The improvement from adding SKA1 is comparable to DES. Speciﬁcations
for DES were taken from Lahav et al. (2010).
straints on both µ0 and γ0 are improved by roughly a factor
of two over Planck - comparable to what can be achieved
with DES (galaxy clustering only). This is not competitive
with bigger spectroscopic galaxy surveys like Euclid or DESI,
but does provide an independent datapoint at low redshift.
4.2.2 Doppler magniﬁcation
There is a contribution to the apparent magniﬁcation of
galaxies due to their peculiar motion, as well as weak gravi-
tational lensing (Bonvin, 2008). The motion of the galaxies
causes a shift in their apparent radial position (as seen in
redshift space), while their angular size depends only on
the actual (real space) angular diameter distance. As such,
a galaxy that is moving away from us will maintain ﬁxed an-
gular size while appearing to be further away than it really
is (and thus ‘bigger’ than it should be for a galaxy at that ap-
parent distance). This effect has been called Doppler mag-
niﬁcation, and dominates the weak lensing convergence at
low redshift (Bacon et al., 2014; Borzyszkowski et al., 2017;
Bonvin et al., 2017; Andrianomena et al., 2018). It can be
detected statistically through the dipolar pattern it intro-
duces in the density-convergence cross-correlation, 〈κδg 〉.
The galaxy density, δg , can be measured from the 3D galaxy
positions, while the convergence, κ, can be estimated from
the angular sizes of the galaxies.
As discussed above, an SKA1 HI galaxy redshift survey
will yield high number densities of galaxies with spectro-
scopic redshifts at z ≲0.4, approximately covering the red-
shift range where Doppler magniﬁcation dominates the
weak lensing convergence. If the HI-emitting galaxies can
be resolved, their sizes can also be measured (e.g. from their
Figure 13. The signal-to-noise ratio of the Doppler magniﬁcation dipole
for SKA1 as a function of separation d at z = 0.15 (the redshift bin in
which the SNR is largest). A pixel size of 4h−1 Mpc has been assumed. The
upper bound and lower bounds are for convergence errors (size noise) of
σκ = 0.3 and σκ = 0.8 respectively.
surface brightness proﬁle in continuum emission), making
it possible to measure the Doppler magniﬁcation signal
using a single survey. Galaxy size estimators often suffer
from large scatter, and it remains an open question as to
how well SKA1 will be able to measure sizes. This scatter
has a signiﬁcant effect on the expected SNR of the Doppler
magniﬁcation signal. There is a known relation between the
size of an HI disk and the HI mass (Wang et al., 2016) that
shows very little scatter over several orders of magnitude,
however. For objects that are spatially resolved in HI, their
expected sizes can be computed from their HI masses, and
compared with their apparent sizes.
Following the forecasting methodology of Bonvin et al.
(2017), we expect SKA1 to achieve a signal-to-noise ratio
of ≈8 on the Doppler magniﬁcation dipole for galaxies
separated by ∼100 h−1Mpc (Fig. 13), assuming a size scat-
ter of σ(κ) = 0.3 (comparable to what optical surveys can
achieve). The cumulative SNR over 0.1 ≤z ≤0.5, for the full
range of separations, is ≈40.
4.2.3 Direct peculiar velocity measurements
The Tully-Fisher relation (Tully & Fisher, 1977) can be used
to infer the intrinsic luminosity of a galaxy from its 21cm
line width, which is a proxy for rotational velocity. Com-
bined with the redshift of the line and a measurement of
the galaxy inclination, this makes it possible to measure
the galaxy’s peculiar velocity in the line-of-sight direction.
The statistics of the peculiar velocity ﬁeld, sampled by a
large set of galaxies, can then be used to measure various
combinations of cosmological quantities. Peculiar veloc-
ity statistics are particularly sensitive to the growth rate of
structure, and so can be used as powerful probes of modi-
ﬁed gravitational physics (e.g. Hellwing et al., 2014; Koda
et al., 2014; Ivarsen et al., 2016).
Measuring the width of the 21cm line requires line detec-
tions with signiﬁcantly better signal-to-noise than would

--- PAGE BREAK ---

10-1
SHI/σSHI
10-3
10-2
10-1
σ(w)/w
Figure 14. Expected fractional error on the width of the 21cm line, as
a function of the signal-to-noise ratio on the integrated line ﬂux. The
vertical dashes lines show three different detection thresholds: (red) 5σ
threshold on the peak per channel SNR; (yellow) 8σ threshold on the peak
per-channel SNR; and (blue) threshold corresponding to σ(vpec) < 0.2c.
be needed to measure redshift alone. Fig. 14 shows the ex-
pected fractional error on the 21cm linewidth of a galaxy
as a function of the signal-to-noise ratio on the integrated
ﬂux of the line, assuming a simpliﬁed Gaussian line proﬁle
model. The 5σ and 8σ thresholds (on the peak per-channel
SNR, not the integrated ﬂux) from Table 7 are shown as red
and yellow dashed lines respectively. These are the thresh-
olds we assumed for 21cm line detection for a redshift-only
survey. To measure the peculiar velocity to better than 20%
of the speed of light (as required by the analysis in Koda
et al., 2014), a fractional measurement precision of ∼2.4%
is required on the linewidth, which translates to a peak per-
channel SNR of ∼110σ according to Fig. 14. As such, the
number density of galaxies for which peculiar velocity mea-
surements are available will be signiﬁcantly lower than for
the redshift-only sample. Some way of measuring the incli-
nation (e.g. from continuum or optical/NIR images) for all
galaxies in the sample is also required. Nevertheless, direct
measurements of the peculiar velocity ﬁeld are sensitive
cosmological probes, so the constraining power of even rel-
atively small peculiar velocity samples can be substantial.
Forecasts for SKA precursor experiments were presented in
Koda et al. (2014), and showed that a ∼3% measurement
of f σ8 should be achievable at z ≃0.025 with a combined
redshift + velocity survey, for example.
4.2.4 Void statistics
Future large-area galaxy surveys will offer an unprece-
dented spectroscopic view of both large and small scales
in the cosmic web of structure. Thanks to its high galaxy
density and low bias, the SKA1 HI galaxy survey will allow
unusually small voids and comoving scales to be probed
compared to other spectroscopic surveys.
Figure 15. Forecast marginalized parameter constraints for w0 and wa
from the void counts of the HI galaxy Medium-Deep Band 2 Survey (grey),
Planck (blue), and both combined (yellow). Apart from the cosmological
parameters, we have also marginalized over uncertainty in void radius
(Sahlén & Silk, 2016), and in the theoretical void distribution function
(Pisani et al., 2015).
Table 9 Forecast dark energy constraints for void counts.
Survey
σ(w0)
σ(wa)
SKA1 HI galaxy void counts
0.22
1.84
Planck+lensing+BAO
0.30
0.85
Joint SKA1 + Planck
0.07
0.34
The number counts (Pisani et al., 2015; Sahlén et al.,
2016), shapes (Massara et al., 2015), RSDs (Sutter et al.,
2014), and lensing properties (Spolyar et al., 2013) of voids
are examples of sensitive void-based probes of cosmology.
Voids are particularly sensitive to the normalization and
shape of the matter power spectrum, its growth rate, and
the effects of screened theories of gravity which exhibit
modiﬁcations to General Relativity in low-density environ-
ments (Voivodic et al., 2017). This is because void distribu-
tions contain objects ranging from the linear to the non-
linear regime, across scale, density and redshift (Sahlén &
Silk, 2016).
We forecast cosmological parameter constraints from
the HI galaxy Medium-Deep Band 2 Survey in our ﬁducial
cosmology, using a Fisher matrix method. The void distri-
bution is modeled following (Sahlén et al., 2016; Sahlén
& Silk, 2016) using an approximate modeling scheme to
incorporate the effects of massive neutrinos on the void
distribution (Sahlén, 2018). We also take into account the
galaxy density and bias for the survey. Below z ≈0.18, the
survey is limited by the void-in-cloud limit. Voids smaller
than this limit tend to disappear due to collapse of the over-
density cloud within which they are situated.
We expect to ﬁnd around 4 × 104 voids larger than

--- PAGE BREAK ---

10h−1Mpc. The marginalised constraints on w0 and wa
inferred from void abundances are shown in Fig. 15 and
Table 9. The SKA1 void counts and Planck+lensing+BAO pa-
rameter constraints offer similar but complementary con-
straining power, and their combination can strengthen the
Figure of Merit by a factor of ∼6 −10. Also including the
sum of neutrino masses as a free parameter only marginally
weakens the void constraints (Sahlén, 2018). Recalling that
additional cosmological information is also available in e.g.
shapes/proﬁles, voids are therefore a promising application
of an SKA1 HI galaxy survey.
4.2.5 Particle dark matter searches in cross-correlation
with γray maps
Camera et al. (2013b) and subsequent studies (Fornengo
& Regis, 2014; Camera et al., 2015c) proposed a new tech-
nique for indirect particle dark matter detection, based on
the cross-correlation of direct gravitational probes of dark
matter, such as weak gravitational lensing or the cluster-
ing of galaxies. A cross correlation between the unresolved
γ-ray background seen by the Fermi Large Area Telescope
(LAT; Atwood et al., 2009) and various cosmological ob-
servables has already been detected (Fornengo et al., 2015;
Xia et al., 2015; Cuoco et al., 2015; Branchini et al., 2017).
Currently, the vast majority of the γ-ray sky is unresolved
and only a few thousand γ-ray sources are known. On large
scales, non-thermal emission mechanisms are expected to
greatly exceed any other process in the low-frequency radio
band and the γ-ray range. Thus, radio data is expected to
correlate with the γ-ray sky and can be exploited to ﬁlter
out the information concerning the composition of the γ-
ray background contained in maps of the unresolved γ-ray
emission.
Here, we present forecasts for the cross-correlation of
SKA1 HI galaxies and the γ-ray sky from Fermi. A major
added value of SKA1 HI galaxies is that is their redshift
distribution peaks at low redshift and has an extremely
low shot noise (see Yahya et al., 2015, Fig. 4). This is the
very regime where the non-gravitational dark matter sig-
nal is strongest. Speciﬁcally, we adopt an SKA1 HI galaxy
survey with speciﬁcs given in Yahya et al. (2015) for the
baseline conﬁguration. We consider only galaxies in the
redshift range 0 < z ≤0.5, which we further subdivide into
10 narrow spectroscopic redshift bins. For the γ-ray angular
power spectrum, we employ the ﬁtting formulæ found by
Tröster et al. (2017) for Pass-8 Fermi-LAT events gathered
until September 2016 (i.e. over eight years of data taking).
This is a conservative choice, as by the time the SKA1 HI
galaxy catalogue will be available, a much larger amount
of Fermi-LAT data will be available. Fig. 16 shows the im-
provement on bounds on particle dark matter cross-section
as a function of dark matter mass when SKA1 HI galaxies
are used, compared with the two main probes studied in
Camera et al. (2015c), i.e. cosmic shear from DES (Year 1
data only) and Euclid. The high density of spectroscopi-
cally detected HI galaxies from the HI galaxy survey pro-
vides constraints on particle dark matter properties that are
10−60% tighter than with state-of-the-art and even future
experiments.
4.2.6 Cross-correlation with gravitational wave sources
Gravitational wave (GW) experiments are expected to di-
rectly detect tens to thousands of binary black holes (BBHs)
and neutron star (NS) coalescence events per year over
the coming decade (e.g. Ng et al., 2018), depending on the
natural rate of mergers and how detector sensitivity im-
proves with time. As the number of known events increases,
and the accuracy of source localisation improves, large GW
source catalogues numbering in the thousands to tens of
thousands of events will be constructed. These can then
be cross-correlated with galaxy surveys such as the SKA1
Medium-Deep Band 2 Survey to constrain cosmological
models and determine properties of the BBH and NS host
galaxy/halo populations.
GWs are lensed by intervening large-scale structure just
as light is, and so by cross-correlating foreground galaxies
(that act as lenses) with a background of GWs, one can per-
form tests of general relativity and dark energy models in
a way that is independent from current tests using galaxy
surveys alone (Raccanelli, 2017). Forecasts are not currently
available for an SKA1 HI galaxy survey, but O(10%) con-
straints on w0, wa, µ0, and γ0 are expected to be achievable
with an SKA2 HI galaxy survey (Raccanelli, 2017).
The angular correlation of GW sources with different
types of galaxies can also be used to understand if merging
high-mass BBHs preferentially trace star-rich galaxies (as
would be the case if they form from objects at the endpoint
of stellar evolution), or the dark matter distribution (as
would be the case if they are primordial black holes). The
most star-rich galaxies are typically found in halos of mass
∼1011−12M⊙, while almost all mergers of primordial BBHs
would happen in halos of ≲106M⊙, as shown in Bird et al.
(2016). Other models (e.g. where high-mass BBHs are the
relics of Population III stars) also predict different host halo
populations. The range of host halo masses determines
the mean bias of the host population. This can be mea-
sured through the cross-correlation of galaxy populations
of known bias with the GW source catalogue, therefore de-
termining the nature of BBH progenitors (Raccanelli et al.,
2016; Scelfo et al., 2018). HI galaxies are present across a
wide range of halo masses, but there is expected to be a cut-
off below ∼108M⊙, where self-shielding of the HI from the
ionising UV background fails (e.g. Bagla et al., 2010). The
cross-correlation between HI galaxies and GW sources can
therefore be expected to strongly constrain the primordial
black hole scenario.
4.2.7 HI model uncertainties
Cosmological constraints from the HI galaxy survey are also
subject to uncertainties in the abundance and spatial dis-
tribution of neutral hydrogen. The combination of current
astrophysical uncertainties on the neutral hydrogen den-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

b -b channel
Fermi ⨯DES Y1 to Fermi ⨯SKA1
Fermi ⨯Euclid WL to Fermi ⨯SKA1
1000
mDM [GeV]
Ratio of 2σ bounds on 〈σav 〉
Figure 16. Improvement factor in constraints on the dark matter annihi-
lation cross-section as a function of particle dark matter mass, when an
SKA1 HI galaxy survey is used for the cross-correlation with Fermi-LAT
data, instead of DES year 1 (blue) or Euclid (orange).
sity and bias parameters, ΩHI and bHI, can be shown to lead
to about a 60−100% uncertainty in current models of the
HI power spectrum (Padmanabhan et al., 2015).
There have been numerous efforts to build accurate halo
models of the HI distribution (e.g. Bagla et al., 2010; Davé
et al., 2013; Villaescusa-Navarro et al., 2014; Padmanab-
han & Refregier, 2017a; Padmanabhan et al., 2017, 2018;
Villaescusa-Navarro et al., 2018a), with free parameters
typically constrained using some subset of currently avail-
able HI observables (galaxy number counts, intensity map-
ping observations, and Damped Lyman-α systems) across
redshifts 0−5 in the post-reionisation universe. HI galaxy
redshift and HI intensity mapping surveys with SKA1 will
greatly expand the amount of data available to constrain
these models, leading to signiﬁcantly enhanced precision
in our knowledge of the relevant parameter values (e.g. see
Table 13 below), and allowing the models themselves to be
distinguished from one another. Recent forecasts by Pad-
manabhan et al. (2018) also suggest that, once priors on HI
model parameters from existing observations are applied,
the cosmological parameter constraints from an SKA1 HI
intensity mapping survey will be generally insensitive to
remaining uncertainties in the astrophysical model. The
same conclusion is also expected to hold for the HI galaxy
redshift survey, at least if we restrict our attention to linear
scales, k ≲0.14Mpc−1.
5 HI INTENSITY MAPPING
Intensity mapping of the neutral Hydrogen line (HI IM)
has been proposed as an innovative technique to probe
the large scale structure of the Universe and deliver pre-
cision constraints on cosmology (Bharadwaj et al., 2001;
Battye et al., 2004; Peterson et al., 2006; Loeb & Wyithe,
2008; Kovetz et al., 2017a). It relies on observations of the
sky intensity from the integrated 21cm line emission over
a wide sky area. For a reasonably large 3D pixel in solid
angle and frequency interval, we expect to have several HI
galaxies in each pixel so that their combined emission will
provide a strong signal. Fluctuations in the observed inten-
sity of this redshifted HI emission will follow ﬂuctuations
in the underlying matter density as traced by the HI emit-
ting galaxies, allowing the density ﬁeld to be reconstructed
on sufﬁciently large scales from intensity maps. Although
with low angular resolution, it is well matched to the scales
required for cosmology. Moreover, as we are probing a spe-
ciﬁc emission line (21cm) we have immediately a one to
correspondence between observed frequency and redshift,
which delivers very high redshift resolution. Such survey
is much less time consuming than a spectroscopic galaxy
survey, which requires a high signal to noise detection of
each individual galaxy.
On the other hand, there will be several foregrounds that
will contaminate the HI intensity mapping signal at the ob-
served frequencies. Cleaning such contaminants is there-
fore a crucial process in using this technique for cosmology
and its convolution with instrumental effects poses a seri-
ous challenge (Alonso et al., 2015c; Wolz et al., 2014, 2015;
Olivari et al., 2018). Note however that this line has little
contamination from other spectral lines, which is an im-
portant advantage over the use of other intensity mapping
tracers (Fonseca et al., 2017).
Several experiments have been proposed in order to mea-
sure this signal, using single dish telescopes or interferome-
ters (Battye et al., 2013; Bandura et al., 2014; Xu et al., 2015;
Newburgh et al., 2016). A precursor survey to the SKA1 with
MeerKAT has also been proposed (Santos et al., 2017). Mea-
surements using the Green Bank Telescope (GBT) produced
the ﬁrst tentative) detection of the cosmological HI inten-
sity signal by cross-correlating with the WiggleZ redshift
survey (Chang et al., 2010; Switzer et al., 2013; Masui et al.,
2013a). More recently, a survey using the Parkes telescope
made a detection in cross-correlation with the 2dF survey
(Anderson et al., 2018).
The large dish array of the SKA-MID can be exploited for
HI intensity mapping measurements. However, SKA-MID
in interferometric mode does not provide enough short
baselines to map the scales of interest with sufﬁcient signal-
to-noise (Bull et al., 2015b). The alternative is to use the
array in single-dish mode instead. The large number of
dishes available with SKA1-MID will guarantee a high sur-
vey speed for probing the HI signal and have the potential to
probe cosmology over a wide range of scales with high sig-
nal to noise (Santos et al., 2015). Keeping the interferometer
data will allow to create high resolution sky images which
can be used for other science as well as calibration. In the
following we consider the Wide Band 1 Survey (0.35 < z < 3)
using the auto-correlation information from each dish, al-
though the same technique can in principle be used for the
Medium-Deep Band 2 Survey (0 < z < 0.4).
We also present the prospects of cosmology with Deep
SKA1-LOW Survey for HI intensity mapping at 3 < z < 6.
One of the prime purposes of the LOW instrument is the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

detection of the HI gas distribution during the Epoch of
Reionisation (EoR), which has been constrained to con-
clude at z > 6. The 200−350 MHz range of LOW is not the
focus of EoR observations, but the EoR pipeline can pro-
vide intensity maps at these frequencies offering unique
opportunities for high redshift cosmology. The combina-
tion of the SKA1-MID and LOW surveys considered here
will provide an unique picture of HI on cosmological scales
over a wide redshift range (0 < z < 6).
5.1 The HI signal and power spectrum
5.1.1 Temperature and bias
The total brightness temperature at a given redshift and in
a unit direction n on the sky can be written as
Tb(z,n) ≈T b(z)
1+bHI(z)δm(z,n)−(1+ z)
H(z) ni∂i
(12)
where bHI is the HI galaxy bias, δm is the matter density
contrast, v is the peculiar velocity of emitters and the av-
erage signal T b is determined by the comoving HI density
fraction ΩHI. The last term in braces describes the effect of
Redshift Space Distortions (RSD). The signal will be com-
pletely speciﬁed once we have a prescription for the ΩHI
and bHI. This can be obtained by making use of the halo
mass function, dn/dM and halo bias, relying on a model
for the amount of HI mass in a dark matter halo of mass M,
i.e. MHI(M) (see Santos et al., 2015, for details). Simulations
have found that almost all HI in the post-reionisation Uni-
verse resides within dark matter halos (Villaescusa-Navarro
et al., 2014; Villaescusa-Navarro et al., 2018b). This fact jus-
tiﬁes the usage of halo models to study the spatial distribu-
tion of cosmic neutral hydrogen (Padmanabhan & Refregier,
2017b; Castorina & Villaescusa-Navarro, 2017; Wolz et al.,
2018; Villaescusa-Navarro et al., 2018b).
5.1.2 Power Spectrum
The ﬁrst aim of the intensity mapping survey will be to
measure the HI power spectrum (or its large sky equiva-
lent, the angular power spectrum). In addition, we will take
advantage of multi-wavelength coverage (e.g. BOSS, DES,
Euclid, LSST see section 2.5) to detect the signal in cross-
correlation. The HI power spectrum signal (with RSDs) can
be written as
PHI(z,k) = ¯Tb(z)2bHI(z)2[1+βHI(z)µ2]2P(z,k),
(13)
which allows to break the degeneracy between ΩHI and
bHI(Masui et al., 2013b). The cross-correlation power spec-
trum will also depend on the galaxy bias, bg and the cross-
correlation coefﬁcient r of the two probes, and can be used,
as mentioned, to mitigate systematic effects.
The following forecasts make use of the Fisher matrix
formulation. Details of the noise calculation for both MID
(single dish and interferometer) and LOW can be found in
Bull et al. (2015b) and Santos et al. (2015). Details on SKA1-
LOW EoR surveys can be found in Koopmans et al. (2015).
Particular care must be taken when combining MeerKAT
and SKA1-MID dishes due to different primary beams and
bands. Note that, when considering measurements with
the interferometer, we assume a strict non-linear cutoff
to deﬁne the maximum wavevector in the Fisher matrix,
kmax = 0.2h/Mpc at all redshifts. This is a conservative
choice, much smaller than the instrumental cutoff.
The ﬁnite number of HI samples in the intensity maps
also results into a shot noise contribution on the power
spectrum measurements. In hydrodynamic simulations,
Villaescusa-Navarro et al. (2018b) found that the ampli-
tude of the HI shot-noise is negligible at z ≤5 (see also
Castorina & Villaescusa-Navarro, 2017) and therefore BAO
measurements through HI intensity mapping will barely
be affected by this. They also found values of the linear
HI bias equal to 0.84, 1.49, 2.03, 2.56, 2.82 and 3.18 at
redshifts 0, 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5, respectively. While the HI bias
is essentially scale-independent down to k ≃1 hMpc−1
at z = 1, at redshifts z ≥3 the HI bias is scale-dependent
already at k = 0.3 hMpc−1. In the following, we forecast the
constraints on the linear bias bHI by the SKA1 IM surveys,
however, they will also be the ﬁrst surveys to investigate
the scale-dependence of the HI clustering signal for all
redshifts 0 < z < 6.
SKA1-MID
The expected error on the measurement of the HI power
spectrum from the Wide Band 1 Survey is shown in Fig. 17
(top panel) for a redshift bin of width ∆z = 0.1 centered
at z = 0.6. Keeping the cosmological parameters ﬁxed to
the Planck 2015 cosmology (Ade et al., 2016a), the only
unknown in PHI is (ΩHIbHI). Employing a Fisher matrix
analysis, we calculate the expected constraints on ΩHIbHI
(Pourtsidou et al., 2017), which are summarized in the ﬁrst
column of Table 10. Using RSDs, the degeneracy between
ΩHI and bHI can be broken and the resulting constraints
are presented in the second column of Table 10.
SKA1-LOW
Here we present predictions on the Deep SKA1-LOW Survey.
Other possibilities (in terms of sky coverage and observa-
tion time) as well as an optimization study will be presented
in an upcoming publication.
In Fig. 17 (bottom panel) we show the predicted HI sig-
nal power spectrum neglecting the effect of RSDs, together
with the predicted measurement errors at z = 4 for the Deep
SKA1-LOW Survey. Performing a Fisher matrix analysis fol-
lowing the methodology in Pourtsidou et al. (2017) we can
constrain ΩHI and bHI. Our derived constraints are quoted
in Table 11. As we can see, intensity mapping with the Deep
SKA1-LOW Survey probes the largely unexplored “redshift
desert” era and can give us valuable information on the evo-
lution of the HI abundance and bias across cosmic time.
Finally, in Fig. 18 we show the derived constraints for

--- PAGE BREAK ---

10-2
10-1
k [Mpc−1 ]
P HI(k) [mK2 Mpc3 ]
z =0.6
10-1
k [Mpc−1 ]
P HI(k) [mK2 Mpc3 ]
z =4
Figure 17. Upper panel: HI detection with the SKA1-MID Wide Band 1
Survey, showing the expected signal power spectrum (black solid) and
measurement errors (cyan) from the HI auto-correlation power spectrum.
The assumed k binning is ∆k = 0.01Mpc−1. Lower panel: HI detection
with the Deep SKA1-LOW Survey, signal power spectrum (solid black line)
and measurement errors (cyan band) at z = 4. We have used a k-binning
∆k = 0.01Mpc−1 and a redshift bin ∆z = 0.3.
Table 10 Forecasted fractional uncertainties on ΩHIbHI, and ΩHI
assuming the SKA1-MID Wide Band 1 Survey and following the
methodology in Pourtsidou et al. (2017). For the ΩHI constraints
we utilize the full HI power spectrum with RSDs. Note that the
assumed redshift bin width is ∆z = 0.1, but we show the results
for half of the bins for brevity. The cosmological constraints are
reported in Fig. 10 and Fig. 11.
σ(ΩHIbHI)/(ΩHIbHI)
σ(ΩHI)/ΩHI
0.002
0.009
0.003
0.011
0.004
0.013
0.005
0.017
0.006
0.022
0.008
0.029
0.010
0.036
0.013
0.046
0.016
0.058
0.020
0.072
0.025
0.091
0.030
0.115
0.038
0.145
0.046
0.183
both SKA intensity mapping surveys (i.e. Wide Band 1 Sur-
vey and Deep SKA1-LOW Survey ) on ΩHI compared to
current measurements.
At this point we note that our forecasts have ignored
residual foreground contamination and other systematic
effects. Assessing these effects using simulations and ex-
ploring the possibility of performing BAO measurements
using this survey is the subject of ongoing work.
103 ΩHI
SKA-IM
Zwaan
Martin
Rhee
Noterdaeme
Crighton
Figure 18. Forecasts for the HI density, ΩHI, using the Wide Band 1 Sur-
vey and Deep SKA1-LOW Survey (black points), and comparison with
measurements (see Crighton et al. (2015) and references therein), follow-
ing the methodology in Pourtsidou et al. (2017). Note that we have used a
very conservative non-linear kmax cutoff for these results.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Table 11 Forecast fractional uncertainties on HI parameters for
intensity mapping with the Deep SKA1-LOW Survey, following the
methodology in Pourtsidou et al. (2017).
σ(ΩHIbHI)/(ΩHIbHI)
σ(ΩHI)/ΩHI
3.15
0.010
0.08
3.45
0.011
0.09
3.75
0.012
0.10
4.05
0.014
0.12
4.35
0.015
0.14
4.65
0.018
0.17
4.95
0.021
0.21
5.25
0.024
0.26
5.55
0.029
0.33
5.85
0.035
0.42
5.2 Cosmological probes using HI Intensity Mapping
5.2.1 Baryon Acoustic Oscillations and Redshift Space
Distortions
As already mentioned in section 4.2.1, Baryon Acoustic Os-
cillations (BAOs) can provide robust measurements on the
angular diameter distance and Hubble rate as a function
of redshift. Such measurements can in turn be used to con-
strain dark energy models and the curvature of the Universe
(Bull et al., 2015b,a; Witzemann et al., 2018). The same is
true for RSDs, which can measure the growth rate, a cru-
cial ingredient for instance in constraining modiﬁed gravity
models. In this section we focus on what can be achieved
with the Wide Band 1 Survey. Exploring the same for Deep
SKA1-LOW Survey is the subject of ongoing work.
The relatively poor angular resolution of SKA1-MID in
single-dish mode at high redshifts/low frequencies will par-
tially smear out the shape of the BAO peak along the angular
direction. Nevertheless, SKA1-MID can still provide com-
petitive constraints on BAO measurements and its derived
quantities using the HI intensity mapping technique. Fol-
lowing the Fisher matrix forecasting method described in
Bull et al. (2015b); Bull (2016), Fig. 10 shows the expected
constraints as a function of redshift on the angular diame-
ter distance D A and Hubble rate H while Fig. 11 shows the
same for the growth rate f σ8. We see that the constraints
are still quite competitive when comparing to concurrent
surveys (e.g. Euclid like). The high redshift resolution of the
HI intensity mapping survey, makes it particularly ﬁt for
line of sight measurements, such as H(z) and the growth
rate.
However, at frequencies ν É 800 MHz, the angular
smoothing is so large that the BAO feature might be hard
to extract from the angular direction. This depends on how
well we can deconvolve the beam given the signal to noise.
Even in this worst case scenario, the frequency resolution
will be good enough to allow for a detection of the radial
BAO. By means of numerical simulations incorporating the
cosmological signal, instrumental effects and the presence
of foregrounds, Villaescusa-Navarro et al. (2017) demon-
strated that the position of the radial BAO peak can be mea-
sured with percent precision accuracy through single-dish
observations in the Band 1 of SKA1-MID.
5.2.2 Ultra-large scale effects
One of the "transformational" measurements expected
from HI intensity mapping with the Wide Band 1 Survey are
the constraints on the power spectrum on ultra-large scales
(past the equality peak). This is an area where a single dish
survey with SKA1-MID can excel given its low resolution,
but large survey speed (Alonso et al., 2015c). Such measure-
ments can provide hints on new physics that only materi-
alise on this ultra-large scales.
One example of such an effect is Primordial non-
Gaussianity (PNG). In particular, PNG of the local type
fNL introduces a scale-dependent correction to clustering
bias (Dalal et al., 2008; Matarrese & Verde, 2008) such that
bHI ∝fNL/k2. The 1/k2 term makes this effect particularly
relevant on very large scales (small k) where statistical de-
tectability is severely limited due to cosmic variance and
large scale systematic effects. Using HI IM only we fore-
cast σ(fNL) = 2.8, assuming Band 1 for SKA dishes and UHF
band for the MeerKAT dishes. Note that our calculations
take into account the telescope beams and marginalise
over the biases. While it is not able to achieve σ(fNL) < 1,
as opposed to more futuristic SKA upgrades (see Cam-
era et al., 2013a), thus distinguishing between single-ﬁeld
and multi-ﬁeld inﬂation, it will be an improvement on
σPlanck(fNL) = 5.0.
Another type of very large scale signatures are the so
called General Relativistic (GR) effects. These GR effects
introduce corrections to the tracers’ transfer function as
leading to a set of terms which are usually gathered together
as a single contribution. They are an important prediction
of GR over the very largest distances that it is possible to
probe observationally, and so constitute a valuable test of
alternative gravitational theories (Hall et al., 2013; Lom-
briser et al., 2013; Baker & Bull, 2015). Alonso et al. (2015d)
has shown that these effects are not detectable in the sin-
gle tracer case due to cosmic variance. However, it will be
crucial to correctly model these relativistic corrections in
future large-scale structure surveys, in order not to bias the
estimation of other ultra-large scale effects such as primor-
dial non-Gaussianity (Camera et al., 2015b).
It is possible to overcome cosmic variance with the multi-
tracer (MT) technique (Seljak, 2009), where one combines
two differently biased dark matter tracers in such a way
that the fundamental statistical uncertainty coming from
cosmic variance can be bypassed. We updated the forecasts
of Alonso & Ferreira (2015) and Fonseca et al. (2015) for fNL
and GR effects using the multi-tracer technique with HI IM
with SKA1 in combination with an overlapping 10,000deg2
Euclid-like survey and 14,000deg2 LSST-like photometric
surveys. In Table 12 we show the forecast marginal errors
on fNL and GR effects for 3 different sets of cosmological

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Table 12 Marginal errors on fNL, lensing (εLens) and GR effects (εGR), which include the Doppler term (εDoppler), Time Delay (εTD),
Sachs-Wolfe (εSW) and Integrated Sachs-Wolfe (εISW), using the MT technique with HI intensity mapping with the SKA1 Wide Band 1
Survey in conjugation with the Euclid and LSST surveys for three prior assumptions.
Synergy
σ(fNL)
σ(εLens)
σ(εGR)
σ(εDoppler)
σ(εTD)
σ(εSW)
σ(εISW)
SKA1 HI IM × Euclid
0.033
0.19
0.033
0.19
SKA1 HI IM × LSST
0.67
0.68
0.043
0.12
0.96
0.043
0.13
parameters: Case 1 – marginal errors on fNL without in-
cluding GR effects; Case 2 – marginal errors on fNL includ-
ing Lensing and GR effects all together; Case 3 – marginal
errors on fNL including Lensing and each GR effect indi-
vidually. Note that all of the ϵ parameters have a ﬁducial
value of ϵ = 1 (see Fonseca et al. 2018 for the deﬁnitions). In
Fig. 19 we show the degeneracy between fNL and lensing
(top) and GR effects (bottom) for the two synergy surveys
considered assuming Case 2. It can be seen that using the
multi-tracer technique, we will be able to break the barrier
σ(fNL) < 1 and make a detection of some GR effects such
as the Doppler term.
5.2.3 HI detection via synergies with optical surveys
Cross correlations between HI intensity mapping and op-
tical galaxy surveys can also provide precise and robust
cosmological measurements, as they have the advantage
of mitigating major issues like systematics and foreground
contaminants that are relevant for one type of survey but
not for the other. For example, in Masui et al. (2013b) the
intensity maps acquired at the Green Bank telescope were
combined with the WiggleZ galaxy survey to constrain the
quantity ΩHIbHIr at z ∼0.8 with a statistical fractional er-
ror ∼16%. r is the cross-correlation efﬁcient of the two
observables ranging 0 < r < 1.
We start by looking at the intensity mapping cross-
correlations with a spectroscopic optical galaxy survey, fol-
lowing Pourtsidou et al. (2017). Fig. 20, top panel, shows
the expected signal and errors for a Euclid-like spectro-
scopic sample (Majerotto et al., 2012) for a redshift bin of
width ∆z = 0.1 centered at z = 1. The assumed sky over-
lap is 10,000 deg2 with corresponding 5,800 hr total observ-
ing time for the IM survey which can be approximately
achieved with the suggested SKA1 Wide Band 1 Survey. The
resulting constraints on ΩHIbHIr (keeping the cosmological
parameters ﬁxed to the Planck 2015 cosmology (Ade et al.,
2016a)) are summarised in Table 13. This table also shows
constraints on f σ8, D A and H from cross-correlations with
Euclid, considering ¯Tb is known.
Cross-correlations with photometric optical galaxy sur-
veys can also be used to constrain HI properties, and per-
form joint probes studies (Pourtsidou et al., 2016). Fig. 20,
bottom panel, shows the expected signal and errors for
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
1.05
1.10
1.15
εLens
Euclid
LSST
1 −σ
2 −σ
Euclid
LSST
1 −σ
2 −σ
Figure 19. The 1σ (thin) and 2σ (thick) contours for the forecasted
marginal errors on fNL and Lensing (top), and GR effects (bottom) us-
ing the multi-tracer technique from HI intensity mapping with the SKA1
Wide Band 1 Survey in combination with Euclid data (solid blue line) and
LSST data (dashed red line). These forecasts assume Case 2 as presented
in Table 12. Combination with LSST will allow to probe fNL ∼1 as well as
detect large scale GR effects.
Stage III DES-like photometric sample for a redshift bin
of width ∆z = 0.1 centered at z = 0.5. The assumed sky
overlap is 5,000 deg2. We can also combine probes such as
HI clustering and optical lensing, or HI clustering and the
CMB, to constrain gravity (Pourtsidou, 2016b) and inﬂation
(Pourtsidou, 2016a).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

10-2
k [Mpc−1 ]
P HIg(k) [mK Mpc3 ]
z =1
10-2
10-1
k[Mpc−1]
PHIg(k)[mKMpc3]
z = 0. 5
Figure 20. HI intensity mapping with SKA1 Wide Band 1 Survey in cross-
correlation with optical surveys, showing the expected signal power spec-
trum (black solid) and measurement errors (cyan). Top: Cross-correlation
with a Euclid-like spectroscopic optical galaxy survey with 10,000 deg2
overlapBottom: Cross-correlation with a DES-like photometric optical
galaxy survey with 5,000 deg2 overlap. The assumed k binning is ∆k = 0.01.
Table 13 Forecast fractional uncertainties on HI and cosmological
parameters assuming HI intensity mapping with the SKA1 Wide
Band 1 Survey and Euclid-like cross-correlation described in the
main text, following the methodology in Pourtsidou et al. (2017).
Note that the assumed redshift bin width is ∆z = 0.1, but we show
the results for half of the bins for brevity.
σ(ΩHIbHIr)
(ΩHIbHIr)
σ(f σ8)
(f σ8)
σ(D A)
σ(H)
0.014
0.04
0.02
0.02
0.018
0.06
0.03
0.02
0.024
0.08
0.05
0.02
0.030
0.10
0.06
0.02
0.038
0.12
0.08
0.03
0.047
0.15
0.09
0.03
Figure 21. This ﬁgure shows 1σ and 2σ constraints on the Mν −σ8 plane
from Planck CMB 2015 alone (grey), SKA1-LOW (green), SKA1-LOW plus
Planck CMB 2015 (blue) and SKA1-LOW plus SKA1-MID plus Planck CMB
2015 plus a spectroscopic galaxy survey (magenta). The lower limit from
neutrino oscillations, together with recent cosmological upper bounds
are shown with dashed vertical lines.
5.2.4 Neutrino masses
The impact of massive neutrinos on the abundance and
clustering of cosmic neutral hydrogen has been studied
in Villaescusa-Navarro et al. (2015) through hydrodynamic
simulations. It was found that neutrino masses do not affect
much the halo HI mass function13, MHI(M,z). Therefore,
neutrino effects on HI properties can easily be explained
through simple HI halo models. Villaescusa-Navarro et al.
(2015) used those ingredients to forecast the sensitivity of
the phase 1 of SKA to neutrino masses, ﬁnding that ob-
servations by SKA1-MID plus SKA1-LOW alone can place
a constrain of σ(Mν) = 0.18eV (2σ), where Mν = P
i mνi .
By adding information from Planck CMB 2015 data alone
that limit can shrink to σ(Mν) = 0.067eV (2σ), while a com-
bination of data from SKA1-MID, SKA1-LOW, Planck and
a spectroscopic galaxy survey like Euclid can yield a very
competitive constraint of σ(Mν) = 0.057eV (2σ). Those con-
straints have been derived with the Wide Band 1 Survey as-
suming observations in Band 1 and 2, and 10,000 hours
of interferometry observations by SKA1-LOW over 20 deg2
at frequencies ν ∈[200,355] MHz. Fig. 21 show those con-
straints projected in the Mν −σ8 plane.
5.2.5 Probing inﬂationary features
Possible anomalies observed in the CMB by WMAP (Peiris
et al., 2003) and Planck (Ade et al., 2014, 2016b; Akrami et al.,
2018) may be connected to features on ultra-large scales
(10−3 < k Mpc/h < 10−2) in the primordial power spectrum,
that are generated by a violation of slow-roll. Constraints
on such primordial features from inﬂation are shown in
Xu et al. (2016); Ballardini et al. (2018) to be signiﬁcantly
13This function represents the average HI mass inside a dark matter halo
of mass M at redshift z.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Figure 22. The marginalized 1−σ error on the resonance amplitude as
a function of frequency in the resonant inﬂationary model, using HI in-
tensity mapping power spectrum measurements (blue dashed line) and
bispectrum measurements (black solid line) from the SKA1-MID Wide
Band 1 Survey (ﬁducial value is f res = 0).
improved by using the ultra-large scale HI intensity map-
ping and continuum surveys of SKA1-MID. The potential
of such surveys for constraining the “resonant” (Chen et al.,
2008), “kink” (Starobinskii, 1992), “step” (Adams et al., 2001;
Adshead et al., 2012) and “warp” (Miranda et al., 2012) in-
ﬂation models is illustrated in Figs. 22 and 23.
Fig. 22 shows constraints on the amplitude of the reso-
nant non-Gaussianity, f res, as a function of the resonance
frequency Cω, using either the scale-dependent bias of the
power spectrum or the bispectrum, with the Wide Band 1
Survey of SKA1-MID (adding Band 2 intensity mapping ob-
servations for z < 0.4), combining the single-dish observa-
tion mode with the interferometric mode. The results show
that even in the presence of foreground contamination,
the upcoming HI intensity mapping observations of the
large-scale structure with the SKA1-MID alone could put
extremely tight constraints on the feature models, poten-
tially achieving orders-of-magnitude improvements over
the two-dimensional CMB measurements. For details on
the parameterization and forecasts see Xu et al. (2016).
Fig. 23 shows the Fisher forecast constraints on the ampli-
tude of the feature versus the scale of the feature in Fourier
space, using Wide Band 1 Survey in both intensity mapping
and continuum on SKA1-MID. SKA1 can constrain parame-
ters of the feature models at > 3σ (for details, see Ballardini
et al. 2018).
HI intensity mapping surveys could be also used in com-
bination with CMB experiments to constrain the scalar
spectral index (ns) and its runnings (αs,βs) and test the
predictions of popular single-ﬁeld slow-roll inﬂation mod-
log(kkink Mpc)
0.000
0.025
0.050
0.075
0.100
0.125
0.150
0.175
0.200
kink
SKA1 (continuum) + CMB
SKA1 (IM) + CMB
3.20
3.15
3.10
3.05
3.00
log(kstep Mpc)
step
3.25
3.20
3.15
3.10
3.05
3.00
log(kwarp Mpc)
warp
Figure 23. Marginalized 68% (shaded areas) and 95% (dashed lines) conﬁ-
dence level contours for the feature wave-number in the kink (top), step
(middle) and warp (bottom) inﬂationary models, using the Planck CMB
2015 alone and combining intensity mapping and continuum data from
the SKA1 Wide Band 1 Survey with the CMB.
els. Current constraints from Planck are σ(ns) = 0.006 and
σ(αs) = 0.007. A Stage IV CORE-like CMB survey (Finelli
et al., 2018) combined with an HI intensity mapping survey
with SKA1 Wide Band 1 Survey could reach σ(ns) = 0.0011
and σ(αs) = 0.0019 (Pourtsidou, 2016a).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Figure 24. Percentage difference for the HI intensity mapping power spec-
trum when the HI distribution is modeled using two different methods:
the halo based method (dotted lines) and the particle based method (solid
lines). Results are shown at z = 3 (left), z = 4 (middle) and z = 5 (right).
The error on the HI power spectrum of the model with CDM, normal-
ized to the amplitude of the 21 cm (CDM) power spectrum is shown in
a shaded region for three different observation times: t0 = 1,000 hours
(grey), t0 = 3,000 hours (blue) and t0 = 5,000 hours (fuchsia). The ﬁeld-of-
view for this example corresponds to an area of between 2.7 and 6 deg2, at
z = 3−5. For clarity, we show the error from one HI-assignment method
only because both are very similar and overlap at the scale of the plot.
5.2.6 Unveiling the nature of dark matter
Intensity mapping offers the opportunity to measure the
matter power spectrum also at intermediate and small
scales. At such scales there could be a signature of the so-
called free streaming of dark matter particles (as in the case
of Warm Dark Matter - WDM), which produces a suppres-
sion of power (Smith & Markovic, 2011). It is thus natural to
explore what could be the constraints achieved by looking
at neutral hydrogen in emission as probed by intensity map-
ping surveys. In (Carucci et al., 2015) the impact of WDM
thermal relics is investigated on the 21 cm intensity map-
ping signal focusing on the high redshift, where structure
formation is closer to the linear regime (Viel et al., 2012); the
authors ﬁnd that there is no suppression of power but there
is an increase of power in a redshift and scale dependent
way at mildly non-linear scales. In Fig. 24 we show the differ-
ence for the HI intensity mapping power spectrum which
is expected between the WDM model and a corresponding
CDM model with the same cosmological parameters, as-
suming a deep and narrow intensity mapping survey with
SKA1-LOW with an area of ∼3−6 deg2 at z = 3−5 with a
range of observation times as described in the caption. It
will be quite important to obtain independent constraints
on ΩHI since, as it is shown in Fig. 25, it is evident that that
there exists a relatively strong degeneracy between the HI
cosmic density and the WDM mass.
The results indicate that we will be able to rule out a 4
keV WDM model with 5,000 hours of observations at z > 3,
with a statistical signiﬁcance larger than 3σ, while a smaller
mass of 3 keV, comparable to present day constraints, can
Figure 25. 1σ and 2σ contours (dark and light areas) of the values of
ΩHI and mWDM determined using the HI power spectrum measured by
SKA1-LOW with three different observation times: 1,000, 3,000 and 5,000
hours (red, green and violet) and using a ﬁeld-of-view between 2.7-6 deg2.
The Fisher matrix analysis is performed using information coming from
redshift z = 3,4 and 5.
be ruled out at more than 2σ conﬁdence level with 1,000
hours of observations at z > 5.
5.2.7 Photometric redshift calibration
With next generation optical surveys such as Euclid and
LSST promising to deliver unprecedented numbers of re-
solved galaxies, immense strain will be placed on the
amount of spectroscopic follow-up required. Through a
clustering-based redshift estimation method which utili-
ties HI intensity maps with excellent redshift resolution, a
well-constrained prediction can be made on the redshift
distribution for an arbitrarily large optical population.
SKA1 HI intensity mapping would be capable of reducing
uncertainties in photometric redshift measurements below
the requirements of DES and LSST (Alonso et al., 2017)
assuming adequate foreground cleaning could be achieved.
Tests have been carried out whereby attempts were made
to recover the redshift distribution for a simulated optical
galaxy catalogue by cross-correlating its clustering with HI
intensity maps (Cunnington et al., 2018).
This method relies on an estimate of bg, bHI (the bias
for the optical galaxies and HI intensity maps respectively)
and a model for the measurement of the mean HI bright-
ness temperature ¯THI. Assuming these are in hand, Fig. 26
presents a proof of concept example using a small survey
(25 deg2) with 1’ beam size, neglecting noise, where HI
emission is estimated using a HI-halo mass relation. Cun-
nington et al. (2018) shows that this result is comparable to
that for the proposed intensity mapping experiment with
the SKA1 Wide Band 1 Survey. We use the Ascaso et al. (2015)
catalogue in which accurate LSST photometric redshifts are
simulated, with 2 pixels per arcminute resolution and 30
redshift bins over a range of 0 < z < 3. This gives the optical
catalogue a low number density of 0.27 galaxies per voxel,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Figure 26. Photometric redshift estimation using HI intensity maps as calibrator for an optical survey such as the LSST. The pink shaded regions show
the range in photometric redshift which galaxies are selected from. The orange line shows the distribution of these chosen galaxies according to their
LSST-like photometric redshift (Ascaso et al., 2015). The black-dashed line shows the true distribution, and the blue points show the HI clustering redshift
estimate (Cunnington et al., 2018).
but despite this, a clustering redshift recovery is still pos-
sible. This is at the expense of the simulations’ halo mass
resolution for the galaxies which must increase for larger
skies due to computational cost. This means that the wide
results are on the conservative side, since including lower
mass galaxies would mean a more complete representation
of the underlying mass density, potentially improving the
cross-correlation.
5.3 Systematics
In this section, we discuss some of the main systematics
that can affect the signal. These are usually a convolution
of strong sky contaminants with imperfections in the tele-
scope. In principle, with a high ﬁdelity model of the instru-
ment it should be possible to model many of these out,
however, many systematics can appear highly degenerate
without knowledge of the origin of the contamination. The
success of intensity mapping with the SKA1 will rely heav-
ily on our ability to suppress residual uncertainties below
the level of the thermal noise. In this section we present
some recent results based on simulations, indicating where
appropriate, where further work will be necessary. There
is a long list of important systematics which still need to
be considered including primary beam effects (sidelobes),
polarization leakage, and standing waves. Combining sim-
ulations with actual observations and data analysis will be
crucial in deﬁning which of these will be the limiting factor.
Upcoming experiments such as the recently built MeerKAT
telescope, which will become part of SKA1-Mid, and the
bespoke BINGO telescope (Battye et al., 2013) will play an
important role in this process in the context of single-dish
observations.
5.3.1 Foregrounds
Intensity mapping observations suffer from contamination
from Galactic and extra-Galactic foregrounds. The main
components of the Galactic foregrounds in intensity map-
ping are synchrotron and free-free emission with ampli-
tudes up to 4 to 5 orders of magnitudes higher than the red-
shifted HI signal. Current all-sky observations of the fore-
grounds are sparse in frequency (Reich & Reich, 1988) and
suffer under high systematic contaminations (Remazeilles
et al., 2015) which limit the possibility of template-ﬁtting.
However, the spectral smoothness of the foregrounds - each
component approximately following a power law in fre-
quency - allows one to separate the spectrally varying HI sig-
nal from the foregrounds. Results of Green Bank Telescope
data analysis show that blind component separation tech-
niques like Singular-Value Decomposition (SVD, Switzer
et al. 2015) and independent component analysis (fastICA,
Wolz et al. 2017) had some success in separating signal and

--- PAGE BREAK ---

foregrounds. Studies of the performance of these methods
on large sky areas (see Wolz et al. 2014, 2015; Alonso et al.
2015a) show that large angular scales ℓ< 30 suffer the most
from foreground contamination. In addition, Alonso et al.
(2015b) demonstrates how the leakage of polarised fore-
grounds can affect the cosmological analysis. Alternative,
promising separation techniques have been proposed by
Chapman et al. (2013); Olivari et al. (2016); Zhang et al.
(2016); Zuo et al. (2018), which provide a diverse collec-
tion of techniques to tackle the foreground subtraction of
the SKA data. Moreover, the overall effects of foreground
residuals on the cosmological interpretation is dramatically
reduced by combining intensity mapping data with optical
galaxy surveys. Wolz et al. (2015) presents a comparison
of foreground removal in the context of intensity mapping
with the SKA.
5.3.2 Red Noise
Red noise, also termed 1/f noise, is a form of noise inherent
to radio receivers which is correlated in time and manifests
itself as gain ﬂuctuations (see Harper et al. 2018 for a de-
tailed exposition of the subject in the context of intensity
mapping).
On time scales larger than 1/fk, where is fk is called
the knee frequency, the noise no longer behaves as "white
noise" and does not integrate down as square root of time.
This behavior typically leads to scan synchronous "stripes"
in maps. Techniques have been proposed to clean such ef-
fects directly on the time ordered data (Janssen et al., 1996;
Maino et al., 2002), which should provide unbiased results
even for time scales longer that the knee frequency, but
this is traded for an overall increase of the noise variance
which could ultimately prevent single dish observations
from being useful for cosmology.
When scanning the sky with the telescope at a particular
scan speed, the timescale 1/fk will translate into an angular
scale, which should be larger than the scale of the feature
(e.g. the BAO scale) one is trying to measure in the thermal
noise dominated regime. Hence, scanning as fast possible
can help some or all the effects of the red noise. This may
not be sufﬁcient with the SKA for the BAO scale and a knee
frequency is ∼1Hz since the maximum scan speed will be
∼3degsec−1. However, one would expect that the red noise
is strongly correlated along the frequency direction. If that
is the case, it might be possible to remove its effects as part
of the foreground cleaning process. In Harper et al. (2018),
such frequency correlations were injected directly in the
noise power spectrum density in a simulated spectroscopic
receiver. For levels of correlation expected for a typically
SKA receiver, it was found that the effects could be removed
to a level where the noise is within a factor of two of the
thermal noise.
An alternative would be to try to calibrate such ﬂuctua-
tions using a noise diode or the sky itself. To calibrate out
1/f noise using a noise diode signal, the uncertainties on
the calibration measurement will need to be signiﬁcantly
better than the r.m.s. ﬂuctuations of the 1/f noise (σ(1/f )).
This can not be done on short timescales over which σ(1/f )
itself is very small (and therefore, not expected to be a prob-
lem), but it might be possible to calibrate the SKA receiver
on 100 seconds or longer timescales, for feasible diode
brightnesses. On 100 second timescales, for a bandwidth
of ∆ν = 50 MHz and diode brightness of 25K, the diode
signal stability needs to be better than 1 part in 104. It might
be possible to use the noise diode in conjunction with com-
ponent separation techniques described above to relax this
requirement.
5.3.3 Bandpass Calibration
Bandpass calibration errors are multiplicative with the total
system temperature of the receiver. As the system tempera-
ture is typically many orders-of-magnitude of greater than
the HI intensity signal, even very small bandpass calibra-
tion errors can have a big impact on signal recovery. For
the SKA receivers, the system temperature is approximately
Tsys = 22 K (at 1200 MHz), while the expected HI ﬂuctuation
scale will be approximately σHI = 0.1 mK in a 10 MHz chan-
nel bandwidth. Assuming that at a minimum, the r.m.s. of
the HI signal and bandpass calibration errors (δ) should be
equal, then
δ = σHI
Tsys
≈5×10−6 ,
(14)
at the scale of interest for the HI signal (e.g. ℓ≈100 cor-
responding to angular scales ∼2◦). This is the calibration
error that should be aimed for in the ﬁnal SKA HI IM survey
per voxel with 4deg2 ×10MHz.
Assuming that calibration will be performed N times
throughout a survey, and assuming that the bandpass cali-
bration uncertainties are Gaussian then the bandpass un-
certainty per calibration should not exceed
∆= 5×10−6p
NcNdishes,
(15)
where Nc is the number of bandpass calibrations per dish,
and Ndishes is the number of dishes (N = NcNdishes). No par-
ticular calibration procedure has been assumed here (e.g.
calibration can be performed from a noise diode or astro-
nomical source), and it assumed that there is no uncertainty
in the calibration procedure being performed. This calcula-
tion also neglects many of the complexities expected of real
calibration errors, such as possible non-Gaussianity, and
correlations in frequency. On the other hand, there could
also be the possibility of dealing with these uncalibrated
uncertainties at the power spectrum level, depending on
the behavior of such ﬂuctuations.
5.3.4 RFI from Navigation Satellites
Residual contamination from satellites can also pose a
problem for HI intensity mapping measurements. Although
the proposed IM survey is in band 1 where such contam-
ination is expected to be smaller than band 2. Here, we

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Figure 27. Expected r.m.s. of emission from global navigation satellite ser-
vices within SKA1 Band 2 compared with the expected instantaneous
receiver noise (black dashed line) for 1 MHz channel widths. The red
dot-dashed line shows the sensitivity for an SKA HI IM survey in Band 2
with 30,000deg2, 200 dishes and 30 days while the orange dot-dashed line
shows the expected HI signal. Note however that the proposed wide HI
intensity mapping survey is in Band 1.
review the recent study of the effect for band 2 (Harper &
Dickinson, 2018) which will indicate some aspects of the
problem.
Fig. 27 shows the expected r.m.s. ﬂuctuations of L-band
emission from satellites when ﬁltering all satellite within
5 degrees of the main beam. The ﬁgure shows that the satel-
lite signal is comparable to the expected instantaneous
sensitivity of the SKA receivers, and greatly exceeds the SKA
survey sensitivity if we consider a large survey in band 2
(20,000deg2, 200 dishes, 30 days, 1 MHz channel widths).
In Harper & Dickinson (2018) it is shown that in general
the satellite emission does not integrate down on the sky
and the residual structure exceeds the expected HI signal
ﬂuctuations at all frequencies within SKA Band 2. However,
some regions of the sky are clearer than others such as a
8,700deg2 patch around the South Celestial Pole (δ < −65◦)
that might make for a good SKA HI IM survey location if
done in band 2.
6 DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
In this paper we have brought together the present state
of the science case for cosmology using SKA1. A brief sum-
mary of the main conclusions are listed below.
Continuum galaxy surveys:
• A continuum survey with SKA1-MID Band 2 of
5,000deg2 (the Medium-Deep Band 2 Survey) is ex-
pected to yield a number density of resolved star-
forming galaxies of 2.7arcmin−2 usable for a weak lens-
ing shear analysis.
• By separating these galaxies into tomographic bins
and measuring their ellipticities to O(10−4) accuracy it
will be possible to measure the dark energy equation
of state to a DETF Figure of Merit of ∼1.5 alone, along
with measurement of matter parameters to ∼5% and
modiﬁed gravity parameters to ∼20%.
• Cross-correlating the weak lensing shear maps made
with SKA1 with optical weak lensing experiments will
retain nearly all of the statistical power of each survey,
while gaining signiﬁcant robustness to both additive
and multiplicative systematics on the cosmological
parameter measurements.
• A continuum survey with SKA1-MID Band 1, covering
20,000deg2 (the Wide Band 1 Survey) will provide a
high quality data set for angular clustering analysis of
large scale structure, and cross-correlation with the
CMB.
• Large-scale clustering data will provide measurements
of primordial non-Gaussianity with statistical errors
around half the best current constraints from the CMB,
as well as measurements of the dark energy, modiﬁed
gravity and homogeneous curvature that are indepen-
dent from, but complementary to, other cosmological
probes.
• The large-area, high redshift radio continuum galaxy
sample will allow measurements of the cosmic dipole,
providing an accurate and independent test of the ori-
gin of the dipole that is impossible with current in-
frared and optical data.
HI galaxy redshift survey:
• A SKA1 HI galaxy sample from the 5,000 deg2 Medium-
Deep Band 2 Survey will provide new independent
measurements of the cosmic expansion rate, distance-
redshift relation, and linear growth rate from 0 < z ≲
0.4. This will cover a signiﬁcant additional fraction of
the southern sky compared to existing optical surveys,
improving constraints on dark energy and modiﬁed
gravity theories in the important late-time (low red-
shift) regime.
• The angular sizes and linewidths of a subset of the
detected HI galaxies can be used to infer line-of-sight
peculiar velocities through the Doppler magniﬁcation
and Tully-Fisher methods respectively. The statistics of
the measured cosmic velocity ﬁeld can provide unique
constraints on modiﬁed gravity theories.
• The HI galaxy sample will reach extremely high num-
ber densities at z ≲0.2, making it possible to reliably
identify even small cosmic voids, and obtain high-SNR
cross-correlations with γ-ray maps. The resulting void
sample can be used as a complementary probe of mat-
ter clustering that is particularly sensitive to modiﬁed
gravity effects, while the γ-ray cross-correlations can
be used to detect dark matter annihilation.
HI intensity mapping:
• The SKA1 Wide Band 1 Survey in combination with the
Deep SKA1-LOW Survey will provide a legacy dataset
of the large-scale matter distribution measuring the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

cosmic HI abundance through cosmic time (0 < z < 6)
with unprecedented precision.
• The excellent redshift precision of the intensity maps
covering large areas allows one to constrain the ex-
pansion history and growth of structure in the Uni-
verse, providing constraints on dark energy with SKA1-
MID comparable to concurrent surveys at other wave-
lengths.
• The HI intensity mapping surveys will also allow to
measure neutrino masses, test Warm Dark Matter
models, and inﬂationary physics.
• Synergies of the intensity mapping surveys with op-
tical surveys such as LSST and Euclid are crucial for
multi-wavelength cosmology and systematics mitiga-
tion (see more detailed discussion below). In partic-
ular, they will provide ground breaking constraints
on ultra-large scale effects such as primordial non-
Gaussianity, potentially a factor of 10 better than cur-
rent measurements.
Synergies with other surveys:
• We have noted the improved systematic control likely
to be possible using the combination of radio data
from the SKA1 with optical/NIR data from Euclid and
LSST. Cross-correlations are in principle able to re-
move all additive residual systematics.
• Using the SKA with other telescopes can provide com-
plementary physical constraints, e.g. from the com-
bination of optical weak lensing with radio intensity
mapping, and vital cross-checks of results by compar-
ing dark energy constraints from optical surveys to
those from the SKA. Cross-correlations of probes can
measure signatures which would otherwise be buried
in noise.
• Different radio and optical populations of galaxies af-
ford a multi-tracer approach to large-scale structure
measurements, removing sample variance.
• In addition, optical and radio surveys mutually sup-
port one another through the provision of redshifts;
intensity mapping can provide calibration of optical
photometric redshifts, while optical surveys can pro-
vide photometric redshift information for the SKA con-
tinuum survey.
The prospects for observational cosmology in the next
decade are particularly promising, with the SKA playing
an important part in concert with the Stage IV optical sur-
veys.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
All authors of the paper contributed to the work presented
and the writing of the paper. There was an editorial board
who were responsible for the planning and bringing to-
gether all the material. This comprised of the working group
chairs, Richard Battye and Laura Wolz who are the corre-
sponding authors for the paper, and members from each
of the Focus Groups: David Bacon and Stefano Camera
for Synergies, Phil Bull for HI galaxies, Ian Harrison for
Weak Lensing, David Parkinson for Continuum Science,
Alkistis Pourtsidou and Mário Santos for HI intensity map-
ping (Mario Santos was previously working group chair and
started the Red Book project), as well as Pedro Ferreira in
editorial capacity. This Editorial Board is listed as the ﬁrst
few authors alphabetically and then all other contributors
as another alphabetical list.
Some of the results in this work have been derived using
the HEALPix (Górski et al., 2005) package. We have used
the public Boltzmann code CLASS (Lesgourgues, 2011) to
compute some theoretical observables.
RB,CD and SH acknowledge support from an STFC Con-
solidated Grant (ST/P000649/1). SC is supported by the Ital-
ian Ministry of Education, University and Research (MIUR)
through Rita Levi Montalcini project ‘P R O M E T H E U S –
Probing and Relating Observables with Multi-wavelength
Experiments To Help Enlightening the Universe’s Structure’,
and by the ‘Departments of Excellence 2018-2022’ Grant
awarded by MIUR (L. 232/2016). PGF acknowledges sup-
port from ERC Grant No: 693024, the Beecroft Trust and
STFC. RM and MGS acknowledge support from the South
African Square Kilometre Array Project and National Re-
search Foundation (Grant Nos. 75415 and 84156). LW is
supported by an ARC Discovery Early Career Researcher
Award (DE170100356). YA acknowledges support from the
Netherlands Organization for Scientiﬁc Research (NWO)
and the Dutch Ministry of Education, Culture and Science
(OCW), and also from the D-ITP consortium, a program of
the NWO that is funded by the OCW. YA is also supported by
LabEx ENS-ICFP: ANR-10-LABX-0010/ANR-10-IDEX-0001-
02 PSL*. HP’s research is supported by the Tomalla Founda-
tion. AR has received funding from the People Programme
(Marie Curie Actions) of the European Union H2020 Pro-
gramme under REA grant agreement number 706896 (COS-
MOFLAGS). TS and DJS gratefully acknowledge support
from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) within
the Research Training Group 1620 ‘Models of Gravity‘.
REFERENCES CITED
Abdalla F. B., et al., 2015, Advancing Astrophysics with the
Square Kilometre Array (AASKA14), p. 17
Adams J., Cresswell B., Easther R., 2001, Phys. Rev. D, 64,
123514
Ade P. A. R., et al., 2014, A&A, 571, A22
Ade P. A. R., et al., 2016a, A&A, 594, A13
Ade P. A. R., et al., 2016b, A&A, 594, A20
Adshead P., Dvorkin C., Hu W., Lim E. A., 2012, Phys. Rev. D,
85, 023531
Aghamousa A., et al., 2016, preprint (arXiv:1611.00036)
Akrami Y., et al., 2018, preprint (arXiv:1807.06211)
Alam S., et al., 2017, MNRAS, 470, 2617

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Albrecht A., et al., 2009, preprint (arXiv:0901.0721)
Alonso D., Ferreira P. G., 2015, Phys. Rev. D, D92, 063525
Alonso D., Bull P., Ferreira P. G., Santos M. G., 2015a, MNRAS,
447, 400
Alonso D., Bull P., Ferreira P. G., Santos M. G., 2015b, MNRAS,
447, 400
Alonso D., Bull P., Ferreira P. G., Maartens R., Santos M. G.,
2015c, ApJ, 814, 145
Alonso D., Bull P., Ferreira P. G., Maartens R., Santos M.,
2015d, ApJ, 814, 145
Alonso D., Ferreira P. G., Jarvis M. J., Moodley K., 2017,
Phys. Rev. D, 96, 043515
Alonso D., et al., 2018, preprint (arXiv:1809.01669)
Amara A., Réfrégier A., 2008, MNRAS, 391, 228
Amendola L., et al., 2013, Living Rev. Rel., 16, 6
Amendola L., et al., 2018, Living Rev. Rel., 21, 2
Anderson C. J., et al., 2018, MNRAS, 476, 3382
Andrianomena S., Bonvin C., Bacon D., Bull P., Clarkson C.,
Maartens R., Moloi T., 2018, preprint, p. arXiv:1810.12793
(arXiv:1810.12793)
Ascaso B., Mei S., Benítez N., 2015, MNRAS, 453, 2515
Astier P., et al., 2006, A&A, 447, 31
Atwood W. B., et al., 2009, ApJ, 697, 1071
Bacon D. J., Andrianomena S., Clarkson C., Bolejko K.,
Maartens R., 2014, MNRAS, 443, 1900
Bagla J. S., Khandai N., Datta K. K., 2010, MNRAS, 407, 567
Baker T., Bull P., 2015, ApJ, 811, 116
Baker T., Ferreira P. G., Skordis C., 2014, Phys. Rev. D, D89,
024026
Ballardini M., Finelli F., Maartens R., Moscardini L., 2018,
Journal of Cosmology and Astro-Particle Physics, 2018,
Bandura K., et al., 2014, in Ground-based and Air-
borne Telescopes V. p. 914522 (arXiv:1406.2288),
doi:10.1117/12.2054950
Bartelmann M., Schneider P., 2001, Phys. Rep., 340, 291
Battye R. A., Davies R. D., Weller J., 2004, MNRAS, 355, 1339
Battye R. A., Browne I. W. A., Dickinson C., Heron G., Maffei
B., Pourtsidou A., 2013, MNRAS, 434, 1239
Bengaly C. A. P., Siewert T. M., Schwarz D. J., Maartens R.,
2018a, preprint (arXiv:1810.04960)
Bengaly C. A. P., Maartens R., Santos M. G., 2018b, J. Cos-
mology Astropart. Phys., 2018, 031
Bharadwaj S., Nath B. B., Sethi S. K., 2001, J. Cosmology
Astropart. Phys., 22, 21
Bird S.,
Cholis I.,
Muñoz J. B.,
Ali- Haïmoud Y.,
Kamionkowski M., Kovetz E. D., Raccanelli A., Riess A. G.,
2016, Phys. Rev. Lett., 116, 201301
Blake C., Wall J., 2002, Nature, 416, 150
Bonaldi A., Harrison I., Camera S., Brown M. L., 2016, MN-
RAS, 463, 3686
Bonaldi A., Bonato M., Galluzzi V., Harrison I., Massardi
M., Kay S., De Zotti G., Brown M. L., 2018, preprint,
(arXiv:1805.05222)
Bonvin C., 2008, Phys. Rev. D, 78, 123530
Bonvin C., Andrianomena S., Bacon D., Clarkson C.,
Maartens R., Moloi T., Bull P., 2017, MNRAS, 472, 3936
Borzyszkowski M., Bertacca D., Porciani C., 2017, MNRAS,
471, 3899
Branchini E., Camera S., Cuoco A., Fornengo N., Regis M.,
Viel M., Xia J.-Q., 2017, ApJS, 228, 8
Braun R., Bourke T., Green J. A., Keane E., Wagg J., 2015,
Advancing Astrophysics with the Square Kilometre Array
(AASKA14), p. 174
Brown M. L., Battye R. A., 2010, MNRAS, 410
Brown M. L., Battye R. A., 2011, ApJ, 735
Bull P., 2016, ApJ, 817, 26
Bull P., Camera S., Raccanelli A., Blake C., Ferreira P., Santos
M., Schwarz D. J., 2015a, Advancing Astrophysics with
the Square Kilometre Array (AASKA14), p. 24
Bull P., Ferreira P. G., Patel P., Santos M. G., 2015b, ApJ, 803,
Camera S., Santos M. G., Bacon D. J., Jarvis M. J., McAlpine
K., Norris R. P., Raccanelli A., Rottgering H., 2012, MNRAS,
427, 2079
Camera S., Santos M. G., Ferreira P. G., Ferramacho L.,
2013a, Phys. Rev. Lett., 111, 171302
Camera S., Fornasa M., Fornengo N., Regis M., 2013b, ApJ,
771, L5
Camera S., Santos M. G., Maartens R., 2015a, MNRAS, 448,
1035
Camera S., Maartens R., Santos M. G., 2015b, MNRAS, 451,
Camera S., Fornasa M., Fornengo N., Regis M., 2015c, J.
Cosmology Astropart. Phys., 1506, 029
Camera S., Harrison I., Bonaldi A., Brown M. L., 2017, MN-
RAS, 464, 4747
Carucci I. P., Villaescusa-Navarro F., Viel M., Lapi A., 2015, J.
Cosmology Astropart. Phys., 7, 047
Castorina E., Villaescusa-Navarro F., 2017, MNRAS, 471,
1788
Challinor A., Lewis A., 2011, Phys. Rev. D, 84, 043516
Chang T.-C., Refregier A., Helfand D. J., 2004, ApJ, 617, 794
Chang T.-C., Pen U.-L., Bandura K., Peterson J. B., 2010,
Nature, 466, 463
Chapman E., et al., 2013, MNRAS, 429, 165
Chen X., Easther R., Lim E. A., 2008, J. Cosmology Astropart.
Phys., 4, 010
Chevallier M., Polarski D., 2001, International Journal of
Modern Physics D, 10, 213
Cole S., et al., 2005, MNRAS, 362, 505
Colin J., Mohayaee R., Rameez M., Sarkar S., 2017, MNRAS,
471, 1045
Crighton N. H. M., et al., 2015, MNRAS, 452, 217
Cunnington S., Harrison I., Pourtsidou A., Bacon D., 2018,
preprint, (arXiv:1805.04498)
Cuoco A., Xia J.-Q., Regis M., Branchini E., Fornengo N.,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Viel M., 2015, ApJS, 221, 29
DESI
Collaboration
al.,
2016,
preprint,
(arXiv:1611.00036)
Dalal N., Dore O., Huterer D., Shirokov A., 2008, Phys. Rev. D,
D77, 123514
Dark Energy Survey Collaboration et al., 2016, MNRAS, 460,
1270
Davé R., Katz N., Oppenheimer B. D., Kollmeier J. A., Wein-
berg D. H., 2013, MNRAS, 434, 2645
Demetroullas C., Brown M. L., 2016, MNRAS, 456, 3100
Demetroullas C., Brown M. L., 2018, MNRAS, 473, 937
Efstathiou G., Sutherland W. J., Maddox S. J., 1990, Nature,
348, 705
Ellis G. F. R., Baldwin J. E., 1984, MNRAS, 206, 377
Ferramacho L. D., Santos M. G., Jarvis M. J., Camera S., 2014,
MNRAS, 442, 2511
Finelli F., et al., 2018, J. Cosmology Astropart. Phys., 1804,
Fonseca J., Camera S., Santos M., Maartens R., 2015, ApJ,
812, L22
Fonseca J., Silva M. B., Santos M. G., Cooray A., 2017, MN-
RAS, 464, 1948
Fonseca J., Maartens R., Santos M. G., 2018, MNRAS, 479,
3490
Fornengo N., Regis M., 2014, Front. Physics, 2, 6
Fornengo N., Perotto L., Regis M., Camera S., 2015, ApJ, 802,
Górski K. M., Hivon E., Banday A. J., Wandelt B. D., Hansen
F. K., Reinecke M., Bartelmann M., 2005, ApJ, 622, 759
Hall A., Bonvin C., Challinor A., 2013, Phys. Rev. D, D87,
064026
Harper S., Dickinson C., 2018, submitted: MNRAS,
Harper S. E., Dickinson C., Battye R. A., Roychowdhury S.,
Browne I. W. A., Ma Y. Z., Olivari L. C., Chen T., 2018,
MNRAS, 478, 2416
Harrison
Brown
2015,
preprint,
(arXiv:1507.06639)
Harrison I., Camera S., Zuntz J., Brown M. L., 2016, MNRAS,
463, 3674
Harrison I., Lochner M., Brown M. L., 2017, preprint, p.
arXiv:1704.08278 (arXiv:1704.08278)
Hellwing W. A., Barreira A., Frenk C. S., Li B., Cole S., 2014,
Phys. Rev. Lett., 112, 221102
Hillier T., Brown M. L., Harrison I., Whittaker L., 2018,
preprint, (arXiv:1810.01220)
Hinshaw G., et al., 2013, ApJS, 208, 19
Högbom J. A., 1974, A&AS, 15, 417
Ivarsen M. F., Bull P., Llinares C., Mota D. F., 2016, A&A, 595,
Jain B., Zhang P., 2008, Phys. Rev. D, 78, 063503
Janssen M. A., et al., 1996, preprint, pp astro–ph/9602009
(arXiv:astro-ph/9602009)
Kaiser N., 1987, MNRAS, 227, 1
Kazin E. A., et al., 2014, MNRAS, 441, 3524
Koda J., et al., 2014, MNRAS, 445, 4267
Koopmans L., et al., 2015, Advancing Astrophysics with the
Square Kilometre Array (AASKA14), p. 1
Kovetz E. D., et al., 2017a, preprint, (arXiv:1709.09066)
Kovetz E. D., Raccanelli A., Rahman M., 2017b, MNRAS, 468,
3650
LSST Dark Energy Science Collaboration 2012, preprint,
(arXiv:1211.0310)
LSST
Science
Collaboration
2009,
preprint,
(arXiv:0912.0201)
Lahav O., Kiakotou A., Abdalla F. B., Blake C., 2010, MNRAS,
405, 168
Laureijs R., et al., 2011a, preprint, (arXiv:1110.3193)
Laureijs R., et al., 2011b, preprint (arXiv:1110.3193)
Lesgourgues J., 2011, preprint (arXiv:1104.2932)
Loeb A., Wyithe J. S. B., 2008, Phys. Rev. Lett., 100, 161301
Lombriser L., Yoo J., Koyama K., 2013, Phys. Rev. D, D87,
104019
Maartens R., Abdalla F. B., Jarvis M., Santos M. G., 2015,
Advancing Astrophysics with the Square Kilometre Array
(AASKA14), p. 16
Macaulay
Wehus
Eriksen
2013,
Phys. Rev. Lett., 111, 161301
Maino D., Burigana C., Górski K. M., Mandolesi N.,
Bersanelli M., 2002, A&A, 387, 356
Majerotto E., et al., 2012, MNRAS, 424, 1392
Markovic K., et al., 2017, MNRAS, 467, 3677
Massara E., Villaescusa-Navarro F., Viel M., Sutter P. M.,
2015, J. Cosmology Astropart. Phys., 1511, 018
Masui K. W., et al., 2013a, ApJ, 763, L20
Masui K. W., et al., 2013b, ApJ, 763, L20
Matarrese S., Verde L., 2008, ApJ, 677, L77
Miranda V., Hu W., Adshead P., 2012, Phys. Rev. D, 86, 063529
Morales M. F., 2006, ApJ, 650, L21
Newburgh L. B., et al., 2016, in Ground-based and Air-
borne Telescopes VI. p. 99065X (arXiv:1607.02059),
doi:10.1117/12.2234286
Ng K. K. Y., Wong K. W. K., Broadhurst T., Li T. G. F., 2018,
Phys. Rev. D, 97, 023012
Obreschkow D., Rawlings S., 2009, ApJ, 703, 1890
Olivari L. C., Remazeilles M., Dickinson C., 2016, MNRAS,
456, 2749
Olivari L. C., Dickinson C., Battye R. A., Ma Y.-Z., Costa A. A.,
Remazeilles M., Harper S., 2018, MNRAS, 473, 4242
Padmanabhan H., Refregier A., 2017a, MNRAS, 464, 4008
Padmanabhan H., Refregier A., 2017b, MNRAS, 464, 4008
Padmanabhan N., et al., 2007, MNRAS, 378, 852
Padmanabhan H., Choudhury T. R., Refregier A., 2015, MN-
RAS, 447, 3745
Padmanabhan H., Refregier A., Amara A., 2017, MNRAS,
469, 2323
Padmanabhan H., Refregier A., Amara A., 2018, preprint,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

(arXiv:1804.10627)
Patel P., Bacon D. J., Beswick R. J., Muxlow T. W. B., Hoyle B.,
2010, MNRAS, 401, 2572
Patel P., et al., 2015, Advancing Astrophysics with the Square
Kilometre Array (AASKA14), p. 30
Peiris H. V., et al., 2003, ApJS, 148, 213
Percival W. J., Samushia L., Ross A. J., Shapiro C., Raccanelli
A., 2011, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society,
London, 369, 5058
Peterson J. B., Bandura K., Pen U. L., 2006, preprint,
(arXiv:astro-ph/0606104)
Pisani A., Sutter P. M., Hamaus N., Alizadeh E., Biswas R.,
Wandelt B. D., Hirata C. M., 2015, Phys. Rev. D, D92,
083531
Planck Collaboration et al., 2016a, A&A, 594, A13
Planck Collaboration et al., 2016b, A&A, 594, A17
Planck Collaboration et al., 2016c, A&A, 594, A24
Planck
Collaboration
al.,
2018,
preprint,
(arXiv:1807.06209)
Pourtsidou A., 2016a, preprint (arXiv:1612.05138)
Pourtsidou A., 2016b, MNRAS, 461, 1457
Pourtsidou A., Bacon D., Crittenden R., Metcalf R. B., 2016,
MNRAS, 459, 863
Pourtsidou A., Bacon D., Crittenden R., 2017, MNRAS, 470,
4251
Raccanelli A., 2017, MNRAS, 469
Raccanelli A., et al., 2011, MNRAS, 424, 19
Raccanelli A., et al., 2015, J. Cosmology Astropart. Phys., 1,
Raccanelli A., Kovetz E. D., Bird S., Cholis I., Muñoz J. B.,
2016, Phys. Rev. D, 94, 023516
Raccanelli A., Shiraishi M., Bartolo N., Bertacca D., Liguori
M., Matarrese S., Norris R. P., Parkinson D., 2017, Physics
of the Dark Universe, 15, 35
Raveri M., Martinelli M., Zhao G., Wang Y., 2016a, preprint,
(arXiv:1606.06268)
Raveri M., Martinelli M., Zhao G., Wang Y., 2016b, preprint,
(arXiv:1606.06273)
Reich P., Reich W., 1988, A&AS, 74, 7
Remazeilles M., Dickinson C., Banday A. J., Bigot- Sazy
M. A., Ghosh T., 2015, MNRAS, 451, 4311
Rivi M., Miller L., 2018, MNRAS, 476, 2053
Rivi M., Lochner M., Balan S. T., Harrison I., Abdalla F. B.,
2018, MNRAS,
Rubart M., Schwarz D. J., 2013, A&A, 555, A117
Sachs R. K., Wolfe A. M., 1967, ApJ, 147, 73
Sahlén M., 2018, preprint, (arXiv:1807.02470)
Sahlén M., Silk J., 2016, preprint (arXiv:1612.06595)
Sahlén M., Zubeldia I., Silk J., 2016, ApJ, 820, L7
Santos M., Bull P., Alonso D., et al. 2015, Advancing Astro-
physics with the Square Kilometre Array (AASKA14), p. 19
Santos M. G., et al., 2017, preprint, (arXiv:1709.06099)
Scelfo G., Bellomo N., Raccanelli A., Verde L., Matarrese S.,
2018, J. Cosmology Astropart. Phys., 09
Schwarz D. J., et al., 2015, Advancing Astrophysics with the
Square Kilometre Array (AASKA14), p. 32
Scoccimarro R., 2004, Phys. Rev. D, 70, 083007
Seljak U., 2009, Phys. Rev. Lett., 102, 021302
Singal A. K., 2011, ApJ, 742, L23
Smith R. E., Markovic K., 2011, Phys. Rev. D, D84, 063507
Spolyar D., Sahlén M., Silk J., 2013, Phys. Rev. Lett., 111,
241103
Starobinskii A. A., 1992, ZhETF Pisma Redaktsiiu, 55, 477
Sutter P. M., Pisani A., Wandelt B. D., Weinberg D. H., 2014,
MNRAS, 443, 2983
Switzer E. R., et al., 2013, MNRAS, 434, L46
Switzer E. R., Chang T. C., Masui K. W., Pen U. L., Voytek
T. C., 2015, ApJ, 815
Thomas D. B., Whittaker L., Camera S., Brown M. L., 2017,
MNRAS, 470, 3131
Tiwari P., Nusser A., 2016, J. Cosmology Astropart. Phys., 3,
Tröster T., et al., 2017, MNRAS, 467, 2706
Tully R. B., Fisher J. R., 1977, A&A, 54, 661
Tunbridge B., Harrison I., Brown M. L., 2016, MNRAS, 463,
3339
Viel M., Markoviˇc K., Baldi M., Weller J., 2012, MNRAS, 421,
Villaescusa-Navarro F., Viel M., Datta K. K., Choudhury T. R.,
2014, J. Cosmology Astropart. Phys., 1409, 050
Villaescusa-Navarro F., Bull P., Viel M., 2015, ApJ, 814, 146
Villaescusa-Navarro F., Alonso D., Viel M., 2017, MNRAS,
466, 2736
Villaescusa-Navarro
al.,
2018a,
preprint,
(arXiv:1804.09180)
Villaescusa-Navarro F., et al., 2018b, ApJ, 866, 135
Voivodic R., Lima M., Llinares C., Mota D. F., 2017,
Phys. Rev. D, D95, 024018
Wang J., Koribalski B. S., Serra P., van der Hulst T., Roychowd-
hury S., Kamphuis P., Chengalur J. N., 2016, MNRAS, 460,
2143
Wilkinson P. N., 1991, in Cornwell T. J., Perley R. A., eds,
Astronomical Society of the Paciﬁc Conference Series
Vol. 19, IAU Colloq. 131: Radio Interferometry. Theory,
Techniques, and Applications. pp 428–432
Wilman R. J., et al., 2008, MNRAS, 388, 1335
Witzemann A., Bull P., Clarkson C., Santos M. G., Spinelli
M., Weltman A., 2018, MNRAS, 477, L122
Wolz L., Abdalla F. B., Blake C., Shaw J. R., Chapman E.,
Rawlings S., 2014, MNRAS, 441, 3271
Wolz L., et al., 2015, in Advancing Astrophysics with the
Square Kilometre Array (AASKA14). p. 35
Wolz L., et al., 2017, MNRAS, 464, 4938
Wolz L., Murray S. G., Blake C., Wyithe J. S., 2018, preprint,
(arXiv:1803.02477)
Xavier H. S., Abdalla F. B., Joachimi B., 2016, MNRAS, 459,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

3693
Xia J.-Q., Cuoco A., Branchini E., Viel M., 2015, ApJS, 217, 15
Xu Y., Wang X., Chen X., 2015, ApJ, 798, 40
Xu Y., Hamann J., Chen X., 2016, Phys. Rev. D, 94, 123518
Yahya S., Bull P., Santos M. G., Silva M., Maartens R., Ok-
ouma P., Bassett B., 2015, MNRAS, 450, 2251
Zhang L., Bunn E. F., Karakci A., Korotkov A., Sutter P. M.,
Timbie P. T., Tucker G. S., Wandelt B. D., 2016, A&AS, 222
Zuo S., Chen X., Ansari R., Lu Y., 2018, preprint,
(arXiv:1801.04082)
AFFILIATIONS
1Institute of Cosmology & Gravitation, University of Portsmouth, Dennis
Sciama Building, Portsmouth PO1 3FX, UK
2Jodrell Bank Centre for Astrophysics, School of Physics and Astronomy,
The University of Manchester, Manchester M13 9PL, U.K.
3School of Physics & Astronomy, Queen Mary University of London, 327
Mile End Road, London E1 4NS, U.K.
4Dipartimento di Fisica, Universitá degli Studi di Torino, Via P. Giuria 1,
10125 Torino, Italy
5INFN – Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare, Sezione di Torino, Via P.
Giuria 1, 10125 Torino, Italy
6INAF – Osservatorio Astroﬁsico di Torino, Strada Osservatorio 20, 10025
Pino Torinese, Italy
7Department of Physics, University of Oxford, Denys Wilkinson Building,
Keble Road, Oxford OX1 3RH, U.K.
8Korea Astronomy and Space Science Institute, Yuseong-gu,
Daedeokdae-ro 776, Daejeon 34055, Korea
9Department of Physics & Astronomy, University of the Western Cape,
Cape Town 7535, South Africa
10SKA South Africa, The Park, Cape Town 7405, South Africa
11Instituto de Astroﬁsica e Ciencias do Espaco, Universidade de Lisboa,
OAL, Tapada da Ajuda, PT1349-018 Lisboa, Portugal
12Astrophysics Group, School of Physics, The University of Melbourne,
Parkville, VIC 3010, Australia
13Department of Physics and Astronomy, University College London,
Gower Street, London, WC1E 6BT, U.K.
14Department of Physics and Electronics, Rhodes University, PO Box 94,
Grahamstown, 6140, South Africa
15Lorentz Institute for Theoretical Physics, Leiden University, P.O. Box
9506, 2300 RA Leiden, The Netherlands
16Département de Physique, École Normale Supérieure, PSL Research
University, CNRS, 24 rue Lhomond, 75005 Paris, France
17Department of Mathematics & Applied Mathematics, University of
Cape Town, Cape Town 7701, South Africa
18INAF - Istituto di Radioastronomia, via Gobetti 101, 40129 Bologna, Italy
19Institut de Ciències del Cosmos (ICCUB), Universitat de Barcelona
(IEEC-UB), Martí Franquès 1, E08028 Barcelona, Spain
20Dept. de Física Quàntica i Astrofísica, Universitat de Barcelona, Martí i
Franquès 1, E08028 Barcelona, Spain
21Argelander-Institut für Astronomie, Auf dem Hügel 71, 53121 Bonn,
Germany
22SKA Organization, Lower Withington, Macclesﬁeld, Cheshire SK11 9DL,
U.K.
23Dèpartement de Physique Theorique and Center for Astroparticle
Physics„ Universite de Genève, 24 quai Ernest-Ansermet, 1211 Genève 4,
Switzerland
24Astrophysics Group, Imperial College London, Blackett Laboratory,
Prince Consort Road, London, SW7 2AZ, United Kingdom
25National Astronomical Observatories, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Beijing 100101, China
26Faculty of Engineering, Kanagawa University, 3-27-1, Rokkakubashi,
Kanagawa-ku, Yokohama-shi, Kanagawa, 221-8686, Japan
27School of Mathematics and Physics, The University of Queensland,
QLD 4072 Australia
28ASTRON, Netherlands Institute for Radio Astronomy, Postbus 2, 7990
AA, Dwingeloo, The Netherlands
29ETH Zurich, Wolfgang-Pauli-Strasse 27, CH 8093 Zurich, Switzerland
30Department of Physics and Astronomy, Uppsala University, SE-751 20
Uppsala, Sweden
31Fakultät für Physik, Universität Bielefeld, Postfach 100131, 33501
Bielefeld, Germany
32SISSA, International School for Advanced Studies, Via Bonomea 265,
34136 Trieste TS, Italy
33Center for Computational Astrophysics, 162 5th Avenue, 10010 New
York, NY, USA
34Faculty of Engineering, Kanagawa University, Kanagawa, 221-8686,
Japan
35Institute for Astronomy, University of Edinburgh, Blackford Hill,
Edinburgh EH9 3HJ, UK
36Dipartimento di Fisica e Astronomia “G. Galilei”, Universitá degli Studi
di Padova, Via Marzolo 8, 35131 Padova, Italy