NASA Operational Simulator for Small Satellites (NOS3): the STF-1 CubeSat case study 
[Integration & Testing; Flight Software] 
Dustin M. Geletko, Matthew D. Grubb, John P. Lucas, Justin R. Morris, Max Spolaor, Mark D. Suder,                 
Steven C. Yokum, and Scott A. Zemerick.  
NASA Independent Verification and Validation (IV&V), Independent Test Capability (ITC)  
Jon McBride Software Testing & Research (JSTAR) Laboratory 
Fairmont, West Virginia 26554, U.S.A. 
Max Spolaor –  max.spolaor@nasa.gov (for publication)  
ABSTRACT 
One of the primary objectives of small satellites is to reduce the costs associated with spacecraft development and 
operations as compared to traditional spacecraft missions.  Small satellite missions are generally able to reduce mis-
sion planning, hardware, integration, and operational costs; however, small satellite missions struggle with reducing 
software development and testing costs.  This paper presents the case study of the NASA Operational Simulator for 
Small Satellites (NOS3), a software-only simulation framework that was developed for the Simulation-to-Flight 1 
(STF-1) 3U CubeSat mission.  The general approach is to develop software simulators for the various hardware 
flight components (e.g., electrical power system, antenna deployment system, etc.) to create a completely virtual 
representation of the actual spacecraft system.  In addition, NOS3 conveniently packages together a set of open-
source software packages including the “42” dynamics simulator, the spacecraft software development framework 
(core Flight System), and a command and control system (COSMOS).  This results in a flexible and easily deploya-
ble simulation environment that can be utilized to support software development, testing, training, and mission oper-
ations.  The NOS3 environment contributed to the success of STF-1 mission in several ways, such as reducing the 
mission’s reliance on hardware, increasing available test resources, and supporting training and risk reduction tar-
geted testing of critical software behaviors on the simulated platform.  The NOS3 has been released as open-source 
and is available at http://www.nos3.org.  
1. Introduction 
The NASA Independent Verification and Validation (IV&V) Program's mission is to provide assurance that 
safety- and mission-critical software will operate reliably and safely.  NASA IV&V provides this service by employ-
ing a set of documented technical methods to the customers' system and software requirements, design, code, and 
tests.  In 2009, the NASA IV&V Program established a simulation development team, the Independent Test Capa-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

bility (ITC).  The ITC team is responsible for developing and maintaining test environments that are capable of ex-
ercising mission and safety critical software.  IV&V teams are able to gain an increased understanding of the soft-
ware execution and behaviors, exercise the system under adverse conditions, and inject faults into the system to gain 
insight into how the software will respond using ITC simulation environments.  This capability thus enables the 
NASA IV&V Program to perform more thorough analyses of unit, build, and system level software tests and opera-
tional test procedures.   
Since its inception, the ITC team has observed the benefits of software-only simulation environments to the 
IV&V Program and its customers but has also witnessed firsthand the benefits to software development organiza-
tions.   ITC-developed software-only simulation environments have enabled risk reduction testing, provided earlier 
execution of operational tests, reduced the development organization’s reliance on hardware, and increased available 
test resources on large spacecraft missions such as Global Precipitation Measurement (GPM) and James Webb 
Space Telescope (JWST).  In addition to these large missions, the ITC team has applied its technologies to small 
satellites, which suffer from some of the same challenges such as long hardware lead times and software develop-
ment/testing resources. 
1.1 NASA CubeSat Launch Initiative 
The NASA CubeSat Launch Initiative (CSLI) provides low-cost access to space for small satellites developed 
by NASA Centers and programs, educational institutions and non-profit organizations.  NASA's investment in such 
technology is two-fold.  First, the small satellite platform provides advanced educational opportunities for students, 
teachers, and faculty to help attract and retain students in Science, Technology, Engineering and Math (STEM) dis-
ciplines.  Second, CSLI promotes partnerships between institutions to develop and mature low-cost technologies and 
pathfinders for the benefit of NASA programs and projects.  Since its inception, the CSLI has selected 152 small 
satellite missions from 85 unique organizations.  However, despite the increase of small satellite opportunities made 
available through CSLI, there remains a considerable amount of risk to these missions.   Most of the standard risks 
involving cost and schedule apply, and are amplified, when dealing with the small-scale and fast-paced environ-
ment.   
1.2 Simulation-to-Flight 1 
As a result of the demonstrated successes of software-only simulation environments and the opportunity to 
launch a spacecraft to demonstrate technologies that benefit NASA programs through CSLI, the NASA IV&V Pro-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

gram and West Virginia University (WVU) collaborated to develop a 3U CubeSat mission, Simulation-to-Flight 1 
(STF-1; Morris et al. 2016).  The primary purpose of STF-1 was to determine and demonstrate the value of develop-
ing, utilizing, and maintaining a software-only simulation during the project lifecycle.  However, a diverse set of 
science experiments, provided by WVU, allowed the project to expand the mission’s overall objective.  The instru-
ments include a cluster of Micro Electro-Mechanical Systems (MEMS) Inertial Measurement Units (IMU) to pro-
duce attitude knowledge (Greenheck et al. 2014); a space-weather experiment including a Geiger counter and 
Langmuir probe (Vassiliadis et al. 2014); a III-V Nitride-based materials optoelectronics experiment (Pachol et al. 
2016); and a Novatel OEM615 GPS coupled with advanced algorithms for precise orbit determination (Watson et al. 
2016).  The science experiments enhanced the mission capabilities as well as provided a diverse set of instruments to 
assess how the simulator would support science instrument development.  Figure 1 provides an illustration of the 
various components and subsystems of the STF-1 CubeSat mission.   

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Figure 1. View of the components and subsystems of the STF-1 Cubesat, all of which have been simulated in NOS3. 
1.3 NASA Operational Simulator for Small Satellites 
The STF-1 mission resulted in the development of a software simulation framework named the NASA Opera-
tional Simulator for Small Satellites (NOS3). The goal of NOS3 is to enhance small satellite software development, 
testing, and training.  With NOS3, the flight software executes as if it were operating in space. NOS3 provides the 
flight software with representative real-world simulated data inputs that it would expect during nominal on-orbit 
operations.  Some of NOS3 features include:   
enabling multiple developers to build and test flight software with simulated hardware models;   
serving as an interface simulator for science instrument / payload teams to communicate with prior to 
hardware integration; 
supporting software development activities; 
enabling hardware integration to parallel software development; 
providing automated testing framework;  
increasing available test resources and;   
enabling operation of the simulated spacecraft using the ground software command and telemetry da-
tabases. 
2. NOS3 overview 
An in-depth analysis of the NOS3 and of its supporting products is presented in the following four subsections.  
Section 2.1 describes the high-level simulator architecture including software interfaces, simulated hardware mod-
els, and actual flight hardware.  Section 2.2 describes the set of software tools that support the NOS3 simulation ar-
chitecture.  These software tools consist of the NASA Operational Simulator (NOS) messaging middleware (NOS 
Engine), the open-source “42” general purpose multi-body, multi-spacecraft dynamic simulation (Stoneking 2008), 
the open-source COSMOS User Interface for Command and Control of Embedded Systems (Melton 2016), and the 
open-source core Flight System (cFS; Wilmot 2005), a platform- and project- independent, reusable software 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

framework inclusive of a set of reusable software applications.  Section 2.3 examines additional ad-hoc software that 
was developed to support and complement NOS3.  Section 2.4 explores how NOS3 is deployed in a ready-to-run 
environment.     
NOS3 Simulator Architecture 
The flexible configuration of the NOS3 simulation architecture as compared to a typical flight system is illus-
trated in Figure 2.  The “Flight Configuration” column provides a typical small satellite flight configuration for the 
flight software: i.e., flight applications, flight libraries, drivers, and flight hardware.  The flight software may use 
flight libraries which provide common functionality.  The flight software and libraries utilize hardware drivers, de-
fined as software components communicating directly with the hardware. This is usually accomplished via reading 
and writing hardware registers and often using a bus protocol such as Universal Asynchronous Receive and Trans-
mit (UART), Inter-Integrated Circuit (I2C), and Serial Peripheral Interface (SPI), or simply applying general pur-
pose input/output (GPIO) signals.   
Figure 2. NOS3 Architecture. NOS3 architecture illustrating both its Flight and Simulation Configuration. Note that the 
Simulation Configuration is identical to the Flight Configuration with the exception of the interface to flight, or simulated Flight 
Hardware. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A typical satellite system has numerous hardware interfaces controlled through an on-board computer.  These 
may include hardware interfaces with electrical power systems, radio frequency communication systems, science 
experiment payloads, orbit and attitude sensing and control systems, and others.  The goal of NOS3 is to substitute 
simulations in place of some or all of these hardware components.   
The “Simulation Configuration” column demonstrates how NOS3 can be utilized in place of the actual hard-
ware.  It should be noted that the NOS3 architecture provides users with the flexibility to execute flight software 
with some or all of the hardware components replaced by a software simulation.  This substitution occurs at the 
functional call interface.  Performing the substitution is as simple as linking the flight software against a NOS3 li-
brary to replace the hardware driver library.  NOS3 utilizes a client-server architecture and as such, a standalone 
NOS3 server manages the communications between flight software and various hardware components.  The stand-
alone server maintains the components, referred to as nodes, that are attached to each hardware bus, the communica-
tions protocol used, etc.  Additionally, NOS3 includes a logging mechanism so that communications between simu-
lation components can be monitored in real-time or in post-analysis to ensure that the data is passed correctly. 
The hardware components that are being substituted with software simulations can be modeled at the fidelity 
required for the tests being performed. Some of the simulators written for STF-1 simply implemented pre-packaged 
data responses to commands from the on-board computer, while others required knowledge of the environment or 
other hardware components. For example, a GPS simulator will need to know the spacecraft position in orbit, there-
fore, this data must be generated dynamically. Simulators requiring this type of dynamic data utilize a connection to 
the “42” software (see Section 2.2.4) to collect the necessary data, and then proceed to package the response in the 
proper hardware format. In addition, the simulated components are able to be manipulated by the user, allowing 
fault testing that typically is not possible, or too dangerous to attempt in a hardware-only test. 
2.2 NOS3 Software Components 
NOS3 integrates a set of existing open-source software components as well as ITC developed software compo-
nents to create a full spacecraft simulation platform.  Figure 3 illustrates how these software components are inter-
connected within NOS3.  The following subsections examine each of these software components and their respective 
purpose: i.e., NOS Engine, COSMOS, cFS Flight Software, “42” Dynamics Simulator, Hardware Simulations. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Figure 3. NOS3 components showing connections between ground station software (COSMOS), Flight Software (cFS), 
and Simulators/Dynamics (42). 
2.2.1 Simulation Middleware: NASA Operational Simulator Engine 
One of the primary software components of the NOS3 simulator is the NOS Engine simulation middleware that 
abstracts the hardware and connects the flight software with the simulated dynamics.  NOS Engine is an in-house 
developed software suite that provides a library of functions to simulate the hardware communication protocols that 
are utilized by the flight software.  As discussed in the previous sections, the hardware driver libraries are replaced 
with NOS Engine libraries utilizing the same function calls. NOS Engine also provides support for various underly-
ing protocols such as TCP/IP, inter-process communication protocol (IPC), and shared memory to transport software 
bus messages that represent the actual hardware bus communication.  This functionality provides a number of 
unique advantages: extremely fast communications; shared memory on a single computer running the flight software 
and the software simulators; and distributed processing such as TCP/IP on multiple computers, one running the 
flight software and others running the software simulators or interfacing with flight hardware, and other configura-
tions based on development and testing requirements. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

One of the challenges of simulated communications protocols (e.g., UART, I2C, SPI, etc.) is being able to rep-
resent their hardware time synchronization clocks within a software-only environment.  Time synchronization 
clocks are used on small satellites for coordinating spacecraft time with ground time, coordinating time between 
various spacecraft components such as the on-board computer software and the radio frequency communication 
component, and providing timing signals for clocks that coordinate communication using protocols such as I2C and 
SPI.  To overcome such a challenge the NOS Engine library contains methods to manipulate and distribute time 
between various components which are connected via software busses in place of what would normally be hardware 
busses.  For example, within NOS3, NOS Engine is utilized to control epochs and periodic clock signals. 
2.2.2 Ground System Software: COSMOS 
COSMOS (Melton 2016) is an open-source command and control software package and it was integrated into 
NOS3 to allow end-to-end testing of STF-1 and to enable the “test as we fly, fly as we test” philosophy.  COSMOS 
provides a sophisticated framework for command and control of satellites and other embedded systems. COSMOS 
was integrated into NOS3 using a collection of text configuration files.  A single text file provides the TCP/IP socket 
configuration information, while additional text files are auto-generated to define the byte patterns representing te-
lemetry and command data sent from the spacecraft to the ground and vice versa.   
NOS3 includes several COSMOS enhancements to automatically generate and keep the data descriptions in the 
embedded code synchronized with the data descriptions in the COSMOS command and telemetry files.  Data analy-
sis mechanisms, in addition to what is provided with COSMOS, were required for the STF-1 mission and have been 
built as Ruby language extensions to COSMOS.  These extensions are also available in NOS3 and provide some of 
the post-processing data reduction for STF-1. It should be noted that despite COSMOS being already integrated into 
the NOS3 framework, it is not architecturally required, and could be replaced by a similar command and control 
software that supports UDP connection. 
2.2.3 Flight Software: core Flight System 
The NASA-developed core Flight System (cFS; Wilmot 2005) is an open-source solution for spacecraft flight 
software, with flight heritage on numerous large and small NASA missions such as the Global Precipitation Meas-
urement (GPM) and the Lunar Atmosphere Dust and Environment Explorer (LADEE).  The cFS application layer 
includes a set of reusable software applications to support flight software development. The reusable applications 
are tailored to the mission requirements using tables, while new applications can also be developed for any mission 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

specific requirement that is not directly provided by cFS. The software supports table driven applications, allowing 
applications to be tuned or changed during development and at runtime, by simply changing the tables’ values with-
out changing the code base.  Another cFS component is a set of common services named the Core Flight Executive 
layer, that are typically needed by satellite systems such as time keeping and timers, executive services for applica-
tions, software bus messaging, and event reporting services. cFS is run on top of a lower level operating system 
framework called the Operating System Abstraction Layer (OSAL; Yanchik 2007), which isolates embedded soft-
ware from the real-time operating system by providing users with an Application Program Interface (API). OSAL 
libraries are available for a range of operating systems including Linux, which allows NOS3 libraries to be substitut-
ed at build time without any changes to the other cFS’s layers. The Platform Support Package (PSP) is the cFS com-
ponent that provides the interface to the hardware drivers for a specific on-board computer. NOS3 is capable of sub-
stituting PSP libraries thus allowing the cFS to use standard function calls for various protocols (e.g., UART, I2C) to 
effectively communicate with the software simulations. The STF-1 mission and, therefore, NOS3 made use of cFS 
not just for its flight heritage reliability, but also for this ability to substitute libraries that share a common API used 
by the flight software. It should be noted that it is architecturally possible to use NOS3 without using cFS and 
OSAL. If cFS is not used an interface library would need to be written to utilize the NOS Engine API. 
2.2.4 Flight Dynamics: “42” 
A fundamental consideration in developing a small satellite simulator is how to provide realistic hardware sig-
nals reacting to the dynamically changing spacecraft environment.  Specifically, as the spacecraft travels, variables 
such as its position, velocity, orientation, solar radiation direction and intensity, magnetic field direction and intensi-
ty change over time.  While the actual hardware signals corresponding to dynamic inputs can be determined from 
hardware data sheets and user's manuals, the dynamic inputs must also be identified for a correct simulator devel-
opment.   
To provide a complete framework for spacecraft simulation, including the specific hardware simulations needed 
for the STF-1 project, we carried out a comprehensive analysis of different dynamic environmental data providers 
within NOS3. After a thorough evaluation of numerous external solutions as well as the possibility of in-house de-
velopment options, we chose the “42” software – a general purpose, multi-body, multi-spacecraft simulation – to 
provide dynamic environmental data (Stoneking 2008).  “42” is an open-source software solution that provides the 
ability to propagate and predict the orbit and orientation of spacecraft, by computing the forces affecting these or-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

bital parameters, secondary gravitational effects, aerodynamic drag, solar radiation pressure, magnetic field interac-
tion, and others. 
2.2.5 Hardware Simulations 
Several simulators have been developed for the hardware components utilized on STF-1, such as the GPS re-
ceiver, the antenna deployment system, and the electrical power system.  While these simulators have features that 
are specific to the hardware components used on STF-1, they also present several elements useful to other satellite 
developers. For instance, they provide detailed, practical examples showing how simulators can be written for hard-
ware components, how to use the NOS Engine communication busses, and how to receive dynamic data from “42”.  
Furthermore, NOS3 supplies a common simulation development framework for adding custom mission simulators; it 
includes functionalities for logging and text file configuration of simulators, it facilitates integrating custom mission 
capabilities and it assists with integrating environmental data providers such as “42”. The framework also allows the 
user to create software simulators of a hardware component, early in the mission lifecycle to support flight software 
development and testing. These simulators can be written by referencing hardware interface control documents 
(ICDs) or data sheets, and further augmented with characteristic data from the hardware when available.  
2.3 NOS3 Supporting Software 
In additional to the core NOS3 simulation components, several other software components were developed and 
are included with NOS3 to provide a more complete environment for operational use.  Two of these components are 
described in the following subsections. 
2.3.1 Mission Planning Software 
An important part of satellite operations is mission planning.  For satellite systems, it can include a multitude of 
tasks such as ground contact planning, power planning, planning when science data collection will take place, as 
well as data reduction once data is returned from the satellite.  In the case of STF-1, ground contact planning was the 
primary procedure that needed to be formulated.  In particular, when a ground contact takes place, the STF-1 opera-
tions team must be in communication with the radio antenna team at the antenna site to ensure that the proper data 
paths are configured and de-configured for the contact, and that the commanding and telemetry receipt planned for 
the contact time is planned and executed as quickly and efficiently as possible.  Prior to the contact time, necessary 
personnel at the antenna and the STF-1 operations sites need to be adequately reserved to avoid scheduling conflicts. 
For STF-1 and other small satellites, ground contact occurs a few times per day with a typical duration of just a few 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

minutes. The specific occurrence of these contacts can be accurately predicted using well-understood concepts of 
orbital mechanics coupled with a satellite’s orbital elements, such as the two-line element (TLE) sets prepared by 
the United States Air Force and the North American Aerospace Defense Command.   
NOS3 provides a collection of Python utilities named Orbit, Inview, and Power Planning that can generate 
charts predicting accurate satellite visibility times from any location on Earth and when a satellite is in sunlight, 
Earth penumbra, and Earth umbra.  The tools use TLE sets as their source of satellite orbital elements, and can gen-
erate tabular ephemeris data with rows indicating date and time, sub-satellite location on the earth, and satellite alti-
tude.  These data can be used for post-processing satellite data to correlate sensor observations with satellite posi-
tion.  For STF-1, science data such as radiation counts from the Geiger counter and plasma field data will be corre-
lated with satellite position during post-collection data reduction activities. 
2.3.2 NOS3 Unit Test Framework 
The benefits of unit and integration-level tests are well known, providing confidence that developed software 
operates as intended and future code changes do not cause unforeseen errors in other parts of the system (regression 
testing). The realization of the importance of testing early and often led us to include mature unit test frameworks 
for both the flight software and the simulators. We adopted the Google GTest framework for the NOS3 simulators 
and the NASA UT-Assert library for the STF-1 flight software. The latter is the standard unit test framework for 
OSAL and core cFS applications. 
Various additions and improvements were made to the UT-Assert library to simplify usage, such as integration 
into the build system and custom-built macros to simplify the process of creating unit tests. In addition, we created 
build targets for the GNU coverage testing tool and the Linux Test Program extension graphical front-end to allow 
the team to generate coverage reports and identify risk areas to improve testing. The separation of the hardware li-
brary in the STF-1 flight software architecture allowed separation of testing at both the application and hardware 
levels. For example, we tested applications with high-level inputs (commands, software bus messages, etc.), while a 
framework was created to stub hardware calls and allow the tester to provide appropriate low-level bus data for de-
tailed hardware library testing. 
Another important improvement to the unit test framework was the ability to run the unit tests on the STF-1 de-
velopment and/or flight boards. Although testing in the NOS3 simulation environment has proven to be beneficial, 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

executing tests on the target architecture helped identify additional problems prior to hardware testing, further reduc-
ing integration times. 
The easy-to-use unit test framework allowed developers to write tests in parallel to application development, 
uncovering issues early in the development cycle. This process saved integration time, in addition to code review 
time, since many bugs were already resolved by the developer prior to reaching those stages of the life cycle.  
2.4 Ready-to-Run Virtual Machines 
The NOS3 collection of software components is conveniently packaged as a ready-to-run virtual machine, re-
ducing the overhead associated with installing and configuring each software component.  NOS3 can be distributed 
as an Oracle VirtualBox virtual machine image or as a collection of command scripts that are used to recreate and 
modify a virtual machine image.  This allows users to have a common development and testing environment, further 
reducing risk to the mission. The standard guest operating system utilized by NOS3 is Ubuntu Linux but the virtual 
machine can run using Oracle VirtualBox on Windows, Mac, or Linux computers.   
3. Results: the STF-1 CubeSat 
At the time of writing this paper, the STF-1 CubeSat mission software development and testing has completed 
and the spacecraft has been delivered for launch in 2018.  Section 3.1 provides an overview of the software com-
plexity of the STF-1 mission, while the remaining sections, Sections 3.2 to 3.4, highlight the three major benefits of 
using NOS3 that were witnessed on the STF-1 mission.   
3.1 STF-1 Software Complexity Overview 
As a metric to assess the overall software complexity, the Source-Lines-of-Code (SLOC) utility (SLOCCount) 
was executed against the STF-1 flight software. This utility measures the size of a computer program by counting 
the number of lines in the program’s source code.  Additionally, the results of the SLOC utility were used as an indi-
cator of software size for the Constructive Cost Model, a procedural cost estimation model. Table 1 lists the STF-1 
SLOC count, with the RTOS and drivers not included because they were vendor provided.  Of the 132,000 total 
SLOC, 25% of the software was newly developed for the STF-1 mission. Using the Constructive Cost Model, 
SLOCCount estimates that the STF-1 applications take 8.25 person-months for development, but this metric does 
not take into account unit testing, integration testing, and access to flight hardware for testing, which are typically 
the bottlenecks for small satellites and space missions.  

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Operationally, the STF-1 flight software is not trivial due to its semi-autonomous on-orbit functionalities that 
are needed to perform science experiments, record science data, and transmit the data to the ground station during 
downlink periods of just a few minutes long. The flight software must be able to simultaneously provide the follow-
ing core functionalities: 1) operate without interaction/commanding from the ground station; 2) it must be aware of 
its power level status for executing time-lapse science experiments; 3) it must start, stop, and pause experiments; 4) 
it is responsible for communicating with various STF-1 hardware components such as sensors, radio, camera, and 
the deployable antenna.  This flight software complexity results in increased mission-risk with respect to develop-
ment and testing schedule.  This type of embedded hardware testing is not possible without hardware-in-the-loop 
availability with the full ground-system software. 
Table 1. STF-1 Flight Software SLOC Counts. STF-1 contained 34K SLOC (24%) of newly developed software. 
Software Component 
Description 
SLOC 
Core Flight System (CFS) +  
Platform Support Package (PSP) 
GSFC reusable  
flight software framework 
50 K + 7 K 
Operating System Abstraction Layer (OSAL) 
GSFC reusable operating system 
abstraction layer API 
41 K 
STF-1 Mission Specific Applications 
Newly developed  
flight software 
34 K 
TOTAL 
132 K 
3.2. Reduced Hardware Reliance 
NOS3 enabled multiple STF-1 developers to work in parallel without monopolizing either a single simulator, 
engineering test unit, or spacecraft flight computer, thus reducing the STF-1 mission’s reliance on hardware. For 
example, while one engineer was developing the electrical power system software, another engineer was developing 
the communications software. Neither engineer needed to utilize the hardware for their development and initial test-
ing.   
NOS3 was utilized extensively by the STF-1 software development team for all aspects of flight software devel-
opment and testing.  Over the course of three person-months in which most of STF-1 software development was 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

accomplished, each team member maintained their own NOS3 virtual environment.  The virtual environment pro-
vided realistic inputs and feedback to the flight software while under development.   
Additionally, NOS3 provided a suitable test environment to support STF-1 flight software integration testing.  
Similar to many other small satellite missions, the STF-1 mission hardware was expensive, limited in supply with 
few spares, and it needed to be configured and setup quickly to support testing.  NOS3 provided the ability to devel-
op and test most flight software functionality without requiring a hardware-in-the-loop test configuration. Hardware 
is still needed to test certain performance and timing requirements.  Without NOS3, STF-1 developers would not 
have been able to develop and test software applications in parallel to these activities.  As a result, it would have 
been very difficult to maintain the flight software development and test schedule.   
3.3 Reduced Risk and Provided a Living Training Package  
The effortless deployment process of the NOS3 software allowed us to setup and configure a large number 
of medium fidelity simulation environments to cross-train personnel and to support risk reduction testing during the 
STF-1 software development. For example, NOS3 was provided to multiple interns during the summer months to 
support mission understanding, static analyses, and additional software testing of custom STF-1 software applica-
tions.  The additional simulation resources allowed the team to test how the various STF-1 software applications 
would respond to adverse conditions thus ensuring STF-1 software robustness.  One of the most critical STF-1 soft-
ware applications, the manager application, which is responsible for semi-automating the spacecraft operations was 
exhaustively tested using NOS3.  NOS3 also allows the tester to introduce fault conditions that are too dangerous or 
expensive to test using hardware, which further reduced mission risk and raised confidence in the flight software.   
3.4 Improved the Software Development Schedule  
NOS3 was able to increase the STF-1 development team’s control of the software development schedule and to 
demonstrate how future software development effort schedules can be shifted ahead of the receipt of hardware com-
ponents.  Table 2 reports the lead times associated with the major STF-1 flight components as compared with the 
associated development time for the NOS3 hardware simulator. It is evident that the level of effort required to devel-
op a hardware-equivalent simulator for the STF-1 mission with NOS3 was rather minimal. Furthermore, a 
NOS3 hardware simulator can be scoped, planned (effort, simulator fidelity, etc.), and efforted whereas hardware 
lead times from vendors change and slip regularly.  NOS3 allowed STF-1 software development to begin as sched-
uled versus when the hardware arrived. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Table 2. STF-1 component lead time compared to NOS3 software simulator development time. By reducing lead time, flight 
software development can start earlier in the mission 
Hardware Component 
STF-1 Lead Time 
NOS3 Sim. Development Time 
Antenna Deployment System 
6 months 
2 weeks 
Electrical Power System 
10 months 
3 weeks 
GPS Receiver 
2 weeks 
2 weeks 
Magnetometer 
6 months 
1 week 
UHF Radio 
7 months 
1 month 
Experimental Payload 
12+ months 
1 week 
4. Conclusions 
The primary purpose of the STF-1 CubeSat mission was to develop a software-only simulation framework and 
supporting tools that would support STF-1 as well as support future small satellite missions.  The resulting byprod-
uct of STF-1 is an open-source, software environment named NOS3.  The NOS3 architecture was designed to be 
flexible and allow multiple configuration and deployment options.  NOS3 conveniently packages a set of open-
source tools (cFS, COSMOS, and “42” dynamics simulator) and a set of STF-1 specific hardware simulators to pro-
vide a virtual spacecraft environment that is easy to configure and deploy to end-users.  NOS3 has demonstrated its 
extreme value to the STF-1 mission by reducing hardware reliance, increasing available test resources, serving as a 
training and risk reduction platform, enabling parallel software development activities that shorten cycles and reduce 
developer costs, and alleviating schedule pressures due to slips in hardware component deliveries.  We plan to con-
tinue NOS3 development in order to support future missions.  As other teams adopt NOS3 for their missions, addi-
tional hardware simulators can be added to the NOS3 simulation library.  NOS3 can currently be found at 
www.nos3.org, and is available under the NASA Open Source License.  To inquire about the NOS3 software, e-mail 
the team at support@nos3.org providing a brief project introduction.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The STF-1 development team would like to thank the NASA IV&V Program, West Virginia University science 
teams, TMC2 Technologies, West Virginia Space Grant Consortium, and West Virginia High Technology Consorti-
um.  Without these contributors, our team would not have been building STF-1, “West Virginia’s First Spacecraft”.  

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Thank you as well to the Goddard Space Flight Center Dellingr, Ice Cube, and Ceres CubeSat missions for their 
collaboration and support.  
REFERENCES 
Greenheck, D.R. et al. (2014): Design and Testing of a Low-Cost MEMS IMU Cluster for SmallSat Applications, 
presented at the 28th Annual AIAA/USU Conference on Small Satellites, Logan, UT, USA, August, 2014. 
Melton, R. (2016): Ball Aerospace COSMOS Open Source Command and Control System, presented at the 30th Annual 
AIAA/USU Conference on Small Satellites, Logan, UT, USA, August, 2016. 
Morris, J. et al. (2016): Simulation-to-Flight 1 (STF-1): A Mission to Enable CubeSat Software-based Verification and 
Validation, presented at the 54th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting. San Diego, California, USA, 2016, Paper 
6.2016-1464. 
Pachol, M. et al. (2016): LOCC: Enabling the Characterization of On-Orbit, Minimally Shielded LEDs, presented at the 
30th Annual AIAA/USU Conference on Small Satellites, Logan, UT, USA, August, 2016, Paper SSC16-P3-05. 
SLOCCount: Available at: https://www.dwheeler.com/sloccount/ (accessed October 16, 2017). 
Stoneking, Eric (2008): A computer program called "42" simulates the attitudes and trajectories of multiple spacecraft 
flying in formation anywhere in the Solar System, in NASA Tech Briefs, December 2008, Document ID 
20080048040. 
Vassiliadis, D. et al. (2014): Undergraduate Student-built Experiments in Sounding-Rocket and Balloon Campaign, 
presented at the AGU Fall Meeting, San Francisco, CA, USA, December 2014, ED21C-3456. 
Watson, R., Sivaneri, V., Gross, J. (2016): Performance Evaluation of Tightly-Coupled GNSS Precise Point Positioning 
Inertial Navigation System Integration in a Simulation Environment, in Proceedings of the AIAA Guidance Naviga-
tion and Control Conference (GNC), San Diego, CA, USA, January 2016. 
Wilmot, J. (2005): A core flight software system, in Proceedings of the 3rd IEEE/ACM/IFIP International Conference on 
Hardware/Software Codesign and System Synthesis, 2005, pp. 13–14. 
Yanchik, N. J. (2007): Operating System Abstraction Layer, presented at Flight Software Workshop, November 5-6, 
2007, Laurel, MD, United States, Document ID 20080040870. 