ALIGN: A System for Automating Analog Layout
Tonmoy Dhar1, Kishor Kunal1, Yaguang Li2, Meghna Madhusudan1, Jitesh Poojary1,
Arvind K. Sharma1, Wenbin Xu2, Steven M. Burns3, Ramesh Harjani1, Jiang Hu2,
Desmond A. Kirkpatrick3, Parijat Mukherjee3, Sachin S. Sapatnekar1, and Soner Yaldiz3
1 University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA
2 Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, USA
3 Intel Labs, Hillsboro, OR, USA
Abstract—ALIGN
(“Analog
Layout,
Intelligently
Generated
from
Netlists”) is an open-source automatic layout generation ﬂow for analog
circuits. ALIGN translates an input SPICE netlist to an output GDSII
layout, speciﬁc to a given technology, as speciﬁed by a set of design
rules. The ﬂow ﬁrst automatically detects hierarchies in the circuit netlist
and translates layout synthesis to a problem of hierarchical block as-
sembly. At the lowest level, parameterized cells are generated using an
abstraction of the design rules; these blocks are then assembled under
geometric and electrical constraints to build the circuit layout. ALIGN
has been applied to generate layouts for a diverse set of analog circuit
families: low frequency analog blocks, wireline circuits, wireless circuits,
and power delivery circuits.
MOTIVATION AND GOALS
ALIGN
(Analog
Layout,
Intelligently
Generated
from
Netlists) is an open-source layout generator for analog
circuits that is currently under development. The release
date for Version 1 of the software ﬂow is in August 2020.
The ALIGN project engages a joint academic/industry team
to translate a SPICE-level netlist into a physical layout,
with 24-hour turnaround and no human in the loop. The
ALIGN ﬂow inputs a netlist whose topology and transistor
sizes have already been chosen, speciﬁcations, and a process
design kit (PDK), and outputs GDSII.
The philosophy of ALIGN is to compositionally synthe-
size the layout by ﬁrst identifying layout hierarchies in the
netlist, then generating correct-by-construction layouts at
the lowest level of hierarchy, and ﬁnally assembling blocks
at each level of hierarchy during placement and routing.
Thus, a key step in ALIGN is to identify these hierarchies
to recognize the building blocks of the design. In doing so,
ALIGN mimics the human designer, who identiﬁes known
blocks, lays them out, and then builds the overall layout
hierarchically. At the lowest level of this hierarchy is an
individual transistor; these transistors are then combined
into larger fundamental primitives (e.g., differential pairs,
current mirrors), then modules (e.g., operational transcon-
ductance ampliﬁers (OTAs)), up through several levels of
hierarchy to the system level (e.g., an RF transceiver).
This work was supported by the DARPA IDEA program under SPAWAR
contract N660011824048.
Active 
Matching
Passive 
Matching
Noise 
Sensitivity
Inductors
Parasitics
Low Frequency 
Analog
Power Delivery
Wireline
Wireless
critical
Critical
Fig. 1: Classiﬁcation of analog circuits, showing the factors
that are important in each category.
ALIGN uses a mix of algorithmic techniques, template-
driven design, and machine learning (ML) to create layouts
that are at the level of sophistication of the expert designer.
Unlike digital designs that are built from a composition
of a small number of building blocks, analog circuits tend
to use a wide variety of structures. Each of these has its
own constraints and requirements, and traditionally only
the expert designer has been able to build circuits that could
deliver high performance. ALIGN targets a wide variety
of analog designs, in both bulk and FinFET technologies,
covering four broad classes of functionality:
Low-frequency components that include analog-to-
digital converters (ADCs), ampliﬁers, and ﬁlters.
Wireline components that include clock/data recov-
ery, equalizers, and phase interpolators.
RF/Wireless components that implement transmit-
ters, receivers, etc.
Power delivery components include capacitor- and
inductor-based DC-to-DC converters.
Each class is characterized by similar building blocks that
may have a similar set of performance parameters, although
it should be mentioned that there is considerable diversity
even within each class. An overview of factors that are
important in the design for each category is summarized
in Fig. 1.
There have been several prior efforts to automate analog
layout synthesis [1]–[7], but these methods are not widely
arXiv:2008.10682v1  [cs.AR]  24 Aug 2020

--- PAGE BREAK ---

deployed in tools today. Some methods address limited
classes of designs; others cannot be tuned to handle a wide
enough set of variants of the same design class. Moreover,
there is a general consensus that prior methods for automat-
ing analog layout have been unable to match the expert
designer, both in terms of the ability to comprehend and
implement specialized layout tricks, and the number and
variety of topologies with circuit-speciﬁc constraints. The
ultimate goal for analog layout synthesis is to match the
quality of a hand-crafted design.
In recent years, the landscape has shifted in several
ways, making automated layout solutions attractive. First,
in nanometer-scale technologies, restricted design rules with
ﬁxed pitches and unidirectional routing limit the full free-
dom for layout that was available in older technologies, thus
reducing the design space to be explored during layout,
reducing the advantage to the human expert. Second, today
more analog blocks are required in integrated systems than
before, and several of these require correct functionality
and modest performance. The combination of increasing
analog content with the relaxation in speciﬁcations cre-
ates a sweet spot for analog automation. Even for high-
performance blocks, an automated layout generator could
considerably reduce the iterations between circuit optimiza-
tion and layout, where layout generation is the primary
bottleneck. Third, the advent of ML provides the promise for
attacking the analog layout problem in a manner that was
not previously possible, and set the stage for no-human-in-
the-loop design.
This article provides an overview of the technical details
of ALIGN and shows how ALIGN has been used to translate
analog circuit netlists to layouts. The core ALIGN engine
can be run with no human in the loop, enabled by ML
algorithms that perform the functions typically performed
by humans, e.g., recognizing hierarchies in the circuit during
auto-annotation, or generating symmetry constraints for
layout. ML algorithms can also be instrumental in creating
rapid electrical constraint checkers, which verify whether
a candidate placement/routing solution meets performance
constraints or not, and using this to guide the place-and-
route engine towards optima that meet all speciﬁcation. For
deeper details, the reader is referred to detailed descriptions
in [8]–[11], and to watch for new publications of ongoing
work by our group.
THE TECHNICAL CORE OF ALIGN
The ALIGN ﬂow consists of ﬁve modules, illustrated in
Fig. 2:
(1) Netlist auto-annotation creates a multilevel hierarchical
representation of the input netlist and identiﬁes structural
symmetries in the netlist. This is a key step that is used to
hierarchically build the layout of the circuit.
(2) Design rule capture abstracts the proprietary PDK into
a simpliﬁed grid, appended with Boolean constraints as
needed, that must be obeyed at all steps during layout.
(3) Constraint generation identiﬁes the performance con-
straints to be met, and transforms them into layout con-
straints, such as maximum allowable net lengths, or con-
straints such as matching/common-centroid based on struc-
tural information identiﬁed during auto-annotation.
Netlist 
auto-
annotation
Electrical 
constraint 
generation
Primitive 
layout 
generation
Block assembly 
(placement, 
floorplanning, routing)
Design 
rules
Input: 
Unannotated 
netlist
Output: 
GDSII
Input: PDK
ALIGN Layout Generator
Machine learning models
CORE LAYOUT GENERATION ENGINE
Fig. 2: Overview of the ALIGN ﬂow.
(4) Parameterized primitive cell generation automatically
builds layouts for primitives, the lowest-level blocks in
the ALIGN hierarchy. Primitives typically contain a small
number of transistor structures (each of which may be
implemented using multiple ﬁns and/or ﬁngers). A param-
eterized instance of a primitive in the netlist is automatically
translated to a GDSII layout in this step.
(5) Hierarchical block assembly performs placement and
routing on the hierarchical circuit structure while meeting
geometric and electrical constraints.
The ﬂow creates a separation between open-source code
and proprietary data. Proprietary PDK models must be
translated into an abstraction that is used by the layout
generators. Parts of the ﬂow are driven by ML models: the
ﬂow provides infrastructure for training these models on
proprietary data.
The overall ALIGN ﬂow is intended to support no-
human-in-the-loop design. However, the ﬂow is modular
and supports multiple entry points: for example, the auto-
annotation module could be replaced by designer annota-
tion, and the rest of the ﬂow could be executed using this
annotation. The ﬂow is ﬂexible to user input: for example,
the user can specify new primitives, and they will be used
by the annotation module as well as the layout generator
within the ﬂow.
Netlist Auto-Annotation
This step groups transistors and passives in the input netlist
into a hierarchical set of building blocks and identiﬁes
constraints on the layout of each block. The input to ALIGN
is a SPICE netlist that is converted to a graph representation.
Next, features of the graph are recognized, and a circuit
hierarchy is created. If the input netlist is partitioned into
subcircuits, such information is used during recognition,
but ALIGN does not count on netlist hierarchy. Instead,
hierarchies are automatically identiﬁed and annotated. It
is important to note that the best layout hierarchy may
sometimes differ from a logical netlist hierarchy; hence,
ALIGN may ﬂatten netlist hierarchies to build high-quality
layouts.
Analog designers typically choose from a large number
for variants of each design block, e.g., between textbooks
and research papers, there are well over 100 widely used
OTA topologies of various types (e.g., telescopic, folded
cascode, Miller-compensated). Prior methods are library-
based (i.e., they match a circuit to prespeciﬁed templates) [4]
or knowledge-based (i.e., they determine block functionality
using a set of encoded rules) [1], or both [12]. Library-
based methods require a large library, while rule-based

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Voutn
Voutp
Vinp
Vinn
Vbiasn
Voutn
Voutp
Vinp
Vinn
Vbiasn
Current mirror
Current mirror
Differential pair
Differential pair
Differential load
Differential load
Switched Capacitor Filter
Current Mirror OTA
Primitives
Voutn
Voutp
Vinp
Vinn
Vbiasn
Current mirror
Differential pair
Differential load
Switched Capacitor Filter
Current Mirror OTA
Primitives
Fig. 3: Extracting netlist hierarchy during auto-annotation.
methods must be supported by an exhaustive knowledge
base, both of which are hard to build and maintain. ALIGN
uses two approaches for annotating circuits blocks, both
based on representing the circuit connectivity using a graph
representation:
Machine learning based methods: For commonly encoun-
tered blocks, the problem of identifying blocks maps on
to whether a subgraph of the larger circuit is isomorphic
to a known cell. However, to allow for design variants,
ALIGN uses approximate graph isomorphism, enabled by
the use of graph convolutional neural networks (GCNs)
that classify nodes within the circuit graph into classes (e.g.,
OTA nodes, LNA nodes, Mixer nodes). With some minimal
postprocessing, it is demonstrated that this approach results
in excellent block recognition. Details of the approach are
provided in [8]. A training set for the GCN, consisting of
1390 OTA circuits, including bias networks, is available on
the ALIGN GitHub repository.
Graph traversal based methods: It is unrealistic to build
a training set that covers every possible analog block, and
for blocks that lie outside the scope of the GCN training
set, we use graph-based approaches to recognize repeated
structures within a circuit. Such structures typically require
layout constraints: for example, analog-to-digital converters
may use a set of binary weighted capacitors or a set of
resistors in an R-2R ladder, and these require careful place-
ment in common-centroid fashion and symmetric routing.
ALIGN employs methods based on graph traversal and ap-
proximate subgraph isomorphism to recognize these array
structures.
Once these structures are recognized in a very large
circuit graph, they form a level of hierarchy. Within these
blocks, lower hierarchical levels can be detected using
conventional subgraph isomorphism methods: sub-blocks
at these levels have fewer variants and can be efﬁciently
recognized using library-based approaches.
Fig. 3 shows the results of auto-annotation on a
switched-capacitor ﬁlter. A GCN-based approach can be
used to identify the current-mirror OTA, and then primitives
within the OTA can be identiﬁed. In the process, lines of
symmetry within each structure can be found, as illustrated
in the ﬁgure. At the primitive level, since the layouts are
generated by the parameterized cell generator, these lines of
symmetry are implicit in the deﬁnition of the primitive. At
higher levels, these can be inferred during auto-annotation.
Design Rule Abstraction
The ALIGN layout tools are guided by process-speciﬁc
design rules that ensure DRC-correctness. The complexity
of design rules has grown signiﬁcantly in recent process
generations. Efforts at building generalized abstractions for
process rules have previously been proposed (e.g., [13]).
ALIGN uses a more efﬁcient design rule abstraction mech-
anism that creates ﬁxed grid structures in FEOL and BEOL
layers, as illustrated in Fig. 4. Major grids (bold lines), repre-
sent centerlines for routes, while minor grids (dashed lines)
correspond to stopping points for features. The gridding
structure and basic process information is abstracted into
a JSON ﬁle. For BEOL layers, this includes:
default wire dimensions, pitch, and grid offset
(Pitch, Width, MinL, MaxL, Offset).
end-to-end spacing design rules (EndToEnd).
metal direction, colors (Direction, Color).
rules
(Space{X/Y},
Width{X/Y},
VencA_{L/H}, VencP_{L,H}).
Via-to-via rule: diagonal vias disallowed
End-to-End
Width
Pitch
Layer-specific gridding
Fig. 4: Design rule abstraction using per-layer grids and rules.
While this is superﬁcially similar to traditional λ-rules,
our abstraction permits a different gridding structure that
can vary from layer to layer, and the use of major/minor
grid lines that represent wire pitches, wire overhangs, as
well as the ability to incorporate via rules through Boolean
constraints. Our approach reduces the complex set of con-
ditions embedded in thousands of rules in a design rule
manual to a massively simpliﬁed and much smaller set,
enforcing some limitations through the choice of grids. It
is found, through comparisons with manual design, that
this leads to minimal or zero degradation in layout quality.
Advanced commercial process nodes (22nm, 10nm, 7nm,
beyond) have been abstracted into this simpliﬁed form. The
abstraction enables layout tools to comprehend PDK fea-
tures such as regular and irregular width and spacing grids
(for each layer), minimum end to end spacing design rules
(between metals in the same track), minimum length design
rules, and enforced stopping point grids. For convenience,
the JSON ﬁle also encodes per unit parasitics for metal
layers and vias.
To facilitate further layout research, we have released
design rules for Mock PDKs based on public-domain infor-
mation to abstract layout rules at a 14nm FinFET node [14]
and a 65nm bulk node [15]. While they do not represent a
real technology, they are realistic. Validation of the design

--- PAGE BREAK ---

tools on these PDKs, which can be freely shared, helps the
software development process.
Constraint Generation
Two types of constraints are generated to guide layout:
Geometric constraints: As the auto-annotation step recog-
nizes known blocks or array structures, it associates geo-
metric requirements with these blocks, such as symmetry,
matching, and common-centroid constraints. For instance,
Fig. 3 shows lines of symmetry in an OTA structure that
must be respected during layout. These constraints are ex-
tracted naturally as part of auto-annotation. In contrast with
prior methods that are based on simulation-intensive sensi-
tivity analysis [16] or graph traversal based exact match-
ing to templates [4], the approach in ALIGN method [9]
combines graph traversal methods with machine learning
based methods and is computationally efﬁcient, capable
of ﬁnding hierarchically nested symmetry constraints even
under approximate matches.
Electrical constraints: ALIGN generates a layout based on a
ﬁxed netlist, and performance shifts are driven by changes
in parasitics from netlist-level estimates to post-layout val-
ues. Therefore, ALIGN translates electrical constraints to
bound the maximum parasitics at any node of the circuit.
For instance, an electrical constraint may be translated to
a maximum limit on the resistance of a wire connecting
two nodes, which in turn corresponds to a constraint on the
maximum length, the number of parallel metal tracks, and
the number of vias on the route connecting these nodes. This
feature is currently being implemented in ALIGN [10], [11]
and is a work in progress. The essential idea is to develop
a fast ML inference engine that operates within the inner
loop of an iterative placer, and for each placer conﬁgura-
tion, determines whether or not its electrical constraints are
satisﬁed.
These constraints are passed on to the layout generation
engine to guide layout at all levels of hierarchy.
Parameterized Primitive Layout Generation
ALIGN provides the user with a predeﬁned library of
parameterizable primitives, as illustrated in Fig. 5. Each
primitive consists of a small number of transistor or passive
units; however, each such unit may consist of multiple repli-
cated structures, such as multiﬁn/multiﬁnger transistors, or
resistive/capacitive arrays.
The primitive cell layout follows the gridded abstraction
deﬁned by the design rules, and cell generation can be
parameterized in terms of the unit cell and the number of
unit cells, as shown in Fig. 6. For a transistor, a unit cell may
be parameterized by the number of ﬁns in a FinFET tech-
nology; for a capacitor, parameterization may correspond to
the size of the unit capacitor. Additionally, primitive layouts
can be parameterized by their aspect ratio, their layout style
(common-centroid vs. interdigitated transistors), the gate
length, the effective widths of critical wires in the cell, etc.
The utility in recognizing primitives and creating pa-
rameterized layouts is in enabling ALIGN to create layouts
that incorporate the appropriate geometric constraints (e.g.,
symmetry or common-centroid). In principle, a layout could
be built using a “sea of transistors,” where the primitive
Fig. 5: Examples of primitive structures.
10K resistor
50fF Capacitor Array
DP – Common-centroid 
DP – Interdigitated
Lg: Lmin
Lg: 4xLmin
By aspect ratio
By # fins/fingers, active width, gate length
By layout pattern
Fig. 6: Parameterization of primitive layouts.
corresponds to a single transistor, but it would be challeng-
ing for such an approach to enforce symmetry requirements
beyond the transistor primitives. Prior methods for primi-
tive layout generation [17]–[20] have generally not been as
modular or scalable as the ALIGN approach.
Hierachical Block Assembly
Given the layouts of all primitives and the hierarchical
block level structure of the circuit, extracted during auto-
annotation, the placement and routing step performs hierar-
chical block assembly that obeys the geometric and electrical
constraints described earlier.
Each layout block in the hierarchy can have multiple
layout options with different shapes generated for each
module. For example, primitives can be parameterized by
aspect ratio, and multiple aspect ratios for other blocks
may be generated. Flexible shapes drive ﬂoorplanning-like
placement algorithms that deliver compact layouts under
the electrical and geometric constraints passed on to them
by the constraint generation step. Routing is integrated into
each hierarchical level, accounting for net length/parasitic
constraints, shielding and symmetry requirements, and con-
forming with the design rules embedded into the PDK
abstraction. The placer is based on prior work using the
sequence pair method [6] and can handle general geometric
constraints, such as symmetry, matching and alignment.
Symmetry, shielding and resistance-constrained routing are
supported during routing.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The ALIGN ﬂow can employ one of two detailed routers:
(a) A constructive router that uses an integer linear pro-
gramming formulation and an A* algorithm; this works
particularly well for more sparse designs. (b) A SAT-based
detailed router1, released by Intel, which is well suited for
congested designs.
WORKING IN AN OPEN-SOURCE ENVIRONMENT
Why Open-source Software?
Aside from technical innovations, ALIGN breaks new
ground in providing a fully open-source analog layout
software, something that has not been available in the past.
The availability of open-source software is crucial for nur-
turing future innovations in the ﬁeld. First, further research
can build upon a “piece of the puzzle” of analog layout
design: for instance, a new cell generator can plug into the
open-source ALIGN ﬂow and show end-to-end results from
netlist to layout, rather than providing limited results at
the end of cell generation. Second, open-source enables a
path to ensure that reported results can be reproducible. The
traction for open-source is evidenced not only through the
efforts in ALIGN, but also in other notable efforts on analog
layout [21], digital layout (including back-end infrastructure
such as parasitic extraction on power delivery that is more
broadly applicable to any other class of design [22].
Open-source Designs
Unlike digital designs, where a wealth of designs exists in
the public domain, the font of analog designs is very sparse.
Design parameters tend to be closely linked with process
nodes and existing automation ﬂows do not allow robust
circuit optimization to meet constraints. Sharing designs
based on a commercial PDK over multiple institutions re-
quires a multiway nondisclosure agreement involving the
institutions, the foundry, and the foundry access provider.
Within the ALIGN team, this issue was complicated by the
need for such an agreement to cover both academic and
industry team members.
The ALIGN GitHub repository hosts a number of sized
analog netlists, a set that is growing, to facilitate open
research. These netlists contain testbenches that measure the
performance parameters of the circuit to verify its adherence
to speciﬁcations. Moreover, as stated earlier, the repository
contains unsized netlist topologies for a variety of OTA
circuits.
Software Infrastructure
The software ﬂow is maintained on a GitHub repository [23]
and may be downloaded and installed in a native Linux
environment. Alternatively, it may be run in a lightweight
Docker container that performs operating system virtual-
ization and enables portability and ease of maintenance.
ALIGN can leverage the use of other open-source tools such
as the KLayout layout viewer. The core software ﬂow is
Python-based, and the computationally intensive engines –
notably the placer and router – are implemented in C++.
1. github.com/ALIGN-analoglayout/AnalogDetailedRouter
The project is aided by the use of tools that are vital to a
open-source infrastructure with continuous integration (CI).
These include CI build ﬂows, using CircleCI, for automated
build of new components as they are added to the repos-
itory; unit testing, using pytest, to verify the correctness
of individual units of source code that is added to the
repository; code coverage to measure how much of the code
is executed by the automated tests, using coverage.py with
Codecov for tracking; and automated code review for code
quality checks using Codacy.
TABLE 1: Post-Layout Performance Analysis of the
ALIGN-generated OTA
Schematic
Manual layout
ALIGN Layout
(RC extract)
(RC extract)
Gain (dB)
24.28
24.22
24.14
3dB frequency (MHz)
UGF (MHz)
Phase margin (◦)
Input offset (mV)
0.13
0.10
TABLE 2: Post-Layout Performance Analysis of the
ALIGN-generated Switched-Capacitor Filter Layout
Speciﬁcation
Schematic
Manual layout
ALIGN layout
(RC extract)
(RC extract)
Gain (dB)
16.1
15.84
15.59
3dB frequency (KHz)
Unity gain frequency (KHz)
3435
3415
3610
Input offset (mV)
0.13
0.10
RESULTS
The ALIGN ﬂow has been applied to generate layouts for
circuits that lie in all four classes: low-frequency analog,
wireline, wireless, and power delivery. We are unaware of a
prior layout generator that has been demonstrated to handle
such a broad class of circuits. Fig. 7 illustrates a sample set
of layouts generated using ALIGN: these include a current-
mirror OTA with bias circuitry and its power grid (Fig. 7b),
a switched capacitor (SC) ﬁlter containing the OTA (Fig. 7c),
an analog-to-digital converter [all low-frequency analog], a
bandpass ﬁlter (Fig. 7e) [wireless], a switched capacitor DC-
to-DC converter (Fig. 7a) [power delivery], and an equal-
izer (Fig. 7f) and an optical receiver (Fig. 7g) [both wireline].
The layouts are compact and regular.
A set of representative results for the post-layout per-
formance analysis of ALIGN-generated layouts for the OTA
(Fig. 7b) and the switched-capacitor ﬁlter (Fig. 7c) contain-
ing the OTA are shown in Tables 1 and 2, respectively. For
the larger block, the switched-capacitor ﬁlter, the extraction
results show a good match with the schematic simulation
TABLE 3: Comparing the performance of the schematic (S),
manual layout (M), and the ALIGN-generated layout (A)
Signal adder
Gain (dB) [∆Gain]
BW (GHz) [∆BW]
Gain (dB) [∆Gain]
BW (GHz) [∆BW]
-5.6
27.9
24.5
-6.0 [-3.5%]
19.8 [-29.0%]
2.3 [-5.8%]
15.7 [-36.1%]
-6.1 [-4.8%]
23.0 [-17.6%]
2.2 [-7.0%]
19.8 [-19.2%]
Linear equalizer
Gain (dB) [∆Gain]
BW (GHz) [∆BW]
Gain (dB) [∆Gain]
BW (GHz) [∆BW]
-10.9dB ∼5.5
26.25
18.0
-10.9dB ∼5.6 [1.0%]
12.58 [-52.1%]
0.9 [-3.4%]
13.9 [-22.8%]
-11.0dB ∼5.0 [-5.6%]
13.40 [-49.0%]
0.8 [-4.2%]
15.7 [-12.8%]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

(a) SC DC2DC
(b) OTA with bias circuitry
(c) SC Filter
(d) ADC
(e) BPF
(f) Equalizer
(g) Optical Receiver
Fig. 7: Sample layouts generated by ALIGN. Note that the
block sizes are different; the layouts are not on the same scale.
(this level of mismatch between schematic and layout per-
formance is quite normal in analog design), attesting to
the quality of the layout. Moreover, the layout respects
symmetry constraints that are considered important by ana-
log designers to guard against parasitic mismatch due to
systematic variability. For both layouts, the performance of
the ALIGN-generated layout is very close to that of the
manual layout.
For a set of wireline circuits, Table 3 shows a comparison
between the performance of the ALIGN-generated layout
and a hand-crafted manual layout, and shows that the
performance of both layouts is comparable.
CONCLUSION
This paper summarizes the current state of the ALIGN ﬂow
for automated analog layout synthesis. ALIGN is open-
source and may be downloaded and used freely [23]. Cur-
rently, the project has seen about 24 months of development,
and can already synthesize layouts for a wide variety of
analog circuits. It is expected that the capabilities of ALIGN
will be enhanced signiﬁcantly over the next few years,
handling more sophisticated circuits, more complex con-
straints, and improved software robustness. The inherent
hierarchical approach adopted by ALIGN is key to ensuring
scalability of the software to larger designs in future, while
also providing high-quality solutions.
REFERENCES
R. Harjani, et al., “OASYS: A framework for analog circuit syn-
thesis,” IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated
Circuits and Systems, vol. 8, pp. 1247–1266, Dec. 1989.
J. Cohn, et al., “KOAN/ANAGRAM II: New tools for device-level
analog placement and routing,” IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits,
vol. 26, pp. 330–342, Mar. 1991.
H. E. Graeb, ed., Analog Layout Synthesis: A Survey of Topological
Approaches. New York, NY: Springer, 2010.
M. Eick, et al., “Comprehensive generation of hierarchical place-
ment rules for analog integrated circuits,” IEEE Transactions on
Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems, vol. 30,
pp. 180–193, Feb. 2011.
H.-C. Ou, et al., “Simultaneous analog placement and routing with
current ﬂow and current density considerations,” in Proceedings of
the ACM/EDAC/IEEE Design Automation Conference, 2013.
Q. Ma, et al., “Simultaneous handling of symmetry, common
centroid, and general placement constraints,” IEEE Transactions on
Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems, vol. 30,
pp. 85–95, Jan. 2011.
C.-Y. Wu, et al., “A pre-search assisted ILP approach to analog
integrated circuit routing,” in Proceedings of the IEEE International
Conference on Computer Design, pp. 244–250, 2015.
K. Kunal, et al., “GANA: Graph convolutional network based
automated netlist annotation for analog circuits,” in Proceedings
of the Design, Automation & Test in Europe, 2020.
K. Kunal, et al., “A general approach for identifying hierarchical
symmetry constraints for analog circuit layout,” in Proceedings of
the IEEE/ACM International Conference on Computer-Aided Design,
2020.
[10] Y. Li, et al., “Exploring a machine learning approach to perfor-
mance driven analog IC placement,” in Proc. ISVLSI, 2020.
[11] Y. Li, et al., “A customized graph neural network model for
guiding analog ic placement,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM
International Conference on Computer-Aided Design, 2020.
[12] P.-H. Wu, et al., “A novel analog physical synthesis methodol-
ogy integrating existent design expertise,” IEEE Transactions on
Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems, vol. 34,
pp. 199–212, Feb. 2015.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

[13] G. Soto, “Discover the power of OPAL, a new high-level design
rule modeling language,” 2017. (Talk at an Si2 Event at DAC 2017,
http://www.si2.org/events/opal/).
[14] C. H. Lin et al., “High performance 14nm SOI FinFET CMOS
technology with 0.0174µm2 embedded DRAM and 15 levels of
Cu metallization,” in IEEE International Electronic Devices Meeting,
pp. 3–8, 2014.
[15] A. Steegen et al., “65nm CMOS technology for low power applica-
tions,” in IEEE International Electronic Devices Meeting, pp. 64–67,
2005.
[16] E. Malavasi, et al., “Automation of IC layout with analog con-
straints,” IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated
Circuits and Systems, vol. 15, no. 8, pp. 923–942, 1996.
[17] S. Bhattacharya, et al., “Correct-by-construction layout-centric re-
targeting of large analog designs,” in Proceedings of the ACM/IEEE
Design Automation Conference, pp. 139–144, 2004.
[18] N. Lourenco, et al., “Laygen-automatic layout generation of analog
ics from hierarchical template descriptions,” in Proc. IEEE Ph. D.
Research in Microelectronics and Electronics, pp. 213–216, 2006.
[19] L. Zhang, et al., “An automated design tool for analog layouts,”
IEEE Transactions on VLSI Systems, vol. 4, pp. 881–894, Aug. 2006.
[20] E. Yilmaz and G. Dundar, “Analog layout generator for cmos
circuits,” IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated
Circuits and Systems, vol. 28, pp. 32–45, Jan. 2008.
[21] B. Xu, et al., “MAGICAL: Toward fully automated analog IC layout
leveraging human and machine intelligence,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE/ACM International Conference on Computer-Aided Design, 2019.
[22] T. Ajayi, et al., “Toward an open-source digital ﬂow: First learnings
from the openroad project,” in Proceedings of the ACM/IEEE Design
Automation Conference, 2019.
[23] “ALIGN: Analog layout, intelligently generated from netlists,”
Software repository, accessed August 1, 2020.
https://github.
com/ALIGN-analoglayout/ALIGN-public.