arXiv:2104.09199v1  [eess.SP]  19 Apr 2021
SPSA-Based Successive Beamforming for Mobile
Satellite Receivers with Phased Arrays
Zheng Chen, Member, IEEE, and Håkan Johansson, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—Efﬁcient and low-complexity beamforming design is
an important element of satellite communication systems with
mobile receivers equipped with phased arrays. In this work, we
apply the simultaneous perturbation stochastic approximation
(SPSA) method with successive sub-array selection for ﬁnding
the optimal antenna weights that maximize the received signal
power at a uniform plane array (UPA). The proposed algorithms
are based on iterative gradient approximation by injecting some
carefully designed perturbations on the parameters to be esti-
mated. Additionally, the successive sub-array selection technique
enhances the performance of SPSA-based algorithms and makes
them less sensitive to the initial beam direction. Simulation results
show that our proposed algorithms can achieve efﬁcient and
reliable performance even when the initial beam direction is not
well aligned with the satellite direction.
I. INTRODUCTION
Satellite communication (SatCom) has been a long-standing
research ﬁeld for several decades. Recently, it has regained the
spotlight because of the intensive discussions on integrating
SatCom infrastructure into mobile networks to achieve seam-
less and ﬂexible wireless connectivity in 5G and beyond [1].
The related application scenarios are particularly meaningful
for providing mobile coverage in those areas that are under-
served by terrestrial cellular base stations, such as oceans and
deserted areas.
Phased array antennas are commonly considered for Sat-
Com on-the-move applications where mobile terminals are
communicating with satellites. A phased array can steer in a
certain direction by electronically adjusting the phase shifts
between the antenna elements. When a phased array on a
moving platform receives satellite signals, the beam pointing
direction needs to match the direction of arrival of the satellite
signals to maximize the received signal power. This procedure
is referred to as beam tracking. Though the fundamental theo-
ries of phased arrays are well investigated, how to exploit the
structure of phased arrays to achieve efﬁcient beam tracking
with low-cost and low-complexity algorithms for SatCom on-
the-move scenario remains a meaningful topic.
Simultaneous perturbation stochastic approximation (SPSA)
is a powerful and effective stochastic optimization tool for
solving multivariate optimization problems without knowing
exactly the gradient of the objective function with respect
to the parameters being optimized [2]–[4]. This method has
been applied in various engineering scenarios that involve
Z. Chen and H. Johansson are with the Department of Electrical En-
gineering (ISY), Linköping University, 58183 Linköping, Sweden. Email:
{zheng.chen, hakan.johansson}@liu.se.
This work was supported by VINNOVA (Swedish Agency for Innovation
Systems).
solving an optimization problem without explicitly knowing
the model, such as source seeking in mobile robot systems
[5]. For beam tracking in SatCom scenario with phased arrays,
the parameters to be optimized are the phase shifts of the
antenna elements. When the received signal power at the
antenna array is the only available knowledge, SPSA can be
a potentially effective solution for ﬁnding the optimal phase
shifts by using gradient approximation. In [6], a receive beam-
forming algorithm based on SPSA method is proposed for a
uniform linear array (ULA). Similar algorithms for uniform
plane array (UPA) have been proposed in [7]–[10]. In [11],
both mechanical and electrical adjustments are considered for
beam tracking in UAV-mounted SatCom, where the electrical
adjustment algorithm is developed by using SPSA with the
array structure information. Recently, SPSA methods have
been adopted for training end-to-end communication systems
with deep neural networks [12].
Nevertheless, all the prior works consider the original form
of the SPSA where two noisy measurements with perturbed
parameters need to be simultaneously obtained in each itera-
tion. This assumption can be unrealistic in practical scenarios
where the channel conditions vary between two measurements.
Another problem is that SPSA-based algorithms might fail
to converge to the global optimal solution if the objective
function is not convex or quasi-convex. In SatCom scenarios
with phased arrays at the receiver side, the objective is to align
the beam direction with the satellite direction. When the initial
beam direction is far from the satellite direction, SPSA-based
algorithms might converge to one of the local optimal points
in the side lobes of the antenna array.
In this paper, we utilize both the original two-point form
and the modiﬁed one-point form of the SPSA method and
propose two angle-domain SPSA algorithms with successive
sub-array selection for mobile satellite receivers. Simulation
results showed that our proposed algorithms provide an effec-
tive and low-cost solution for receive beamforming in SatCom
systems with phased arrays. Particularly, the successive sub-
array selection design makes the SPSA-based algorithms less
sensitive to the initial beam direction and achieves more robust
performance under practical conditions.
II. SYSTEM MODEL
We consider a satellite communication system where a mov-
ing vehicle receives signals from a single-antenna geostation-
ary satellite. The vehicle is equipped with a two-dimensional
UPA, which contains 푀× 푁uniformly spaced antennas with
antenna spacing equal to 푑. The UPA has only one RF chain,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

which corresponds to the single channel receiver scenario. Let
훼and 훽denote the direction of arrival (DoA) of the satellite
signals seen at the UPA, where 훼is the azimuth angle and 훽
is the elevation angle.
A. Channel Model
Assuming zero-band signal with carrier frequency 푓푐, the
frequency response at the (푚, 푛)-th antenna element is:
퐴(푚, 푛) =exp
푗2휋푑푓푐
(푚−1) sin 훼cos 훽+ (푛−1) sin 훼sin 훽
where 푐is the speed of light, 푚= 1, . . . , 푀, and 푛= 1, . . . , 푁.
Let A(훼, 훽) represent the 푀× 푁array gain matrix when
the satellite signal arrives at the UPA with the DoA (훼, 훽).
Considering the fact that the channel between the satellite and
a mobile vehicle on the ground is most likely to be line-of-
sight (LoS), we consider a similar channel model as in [11].
The 푀× 푁channel matrix is be modeled as
H = 퐶· exp( 푗휙0)A,
where 퐶is a complex-valued constant parameter related to the
signal power attenuation in the environment, and 휙0 denotes
the phase of the arrived signal at the ﬁrst antenna element. The
vector form of the channel gain can be written as h = vec(H),
where the dimension of h is 푀푁× 1.
We assume that the UPA contains phase shifters without
ampliﬁcation capability. Let w = [푤1, . . . , 푤푀푁]푇denote the
vector of antenna weights, we have |푤푖| = 1,∀푖. Each antenna
weight corresponds to a certain phase shift, i.e., 푤푖= exp( 푗휙푖),
where 휙푖is the phase shift of the 푖-th antenna element. The
received signal at the output of the antenna array is
푦= w퐻h푠+ w퐻n,
where 푠denotes the transmitted data symbol from the satellite,
and n denotes the size 푀푁×1 noise vector added at the input
of the UPA. The instantaneous received signal power is
푃= |푦|2 = w퐻R푠w + w퐻R푛w,
where R푠= h푠푠퐻h퐻and R푛= nn퐻are covariance matrices
of the signal and noise.
If we have perfect knowledge of the channel vector h (or
the DoA), it is well known that the received signal power
or the signal-to-noise ratio is maximized when a matched
ﬁlter is applied. Then, the optimal antenna weight vector is
w = vec(A(훼, 훽)), given the DoA of the satellite signals. In
reality, accurate DoA estimation usually requires advanced RF
chains with high computational complexity. Therefore, in this
work, we propose several low-cost zero-knowledge algorithms
for single channel receive beamforming without the need of
advanced hardware and signal processing units. The theory
behind the proposed algorithms is simultaneous perturbation
stochastic approximation (SPSA) method.
B. Preliminaries on SPSA
SPSA is an effective multivariate optimization method when
the gradient of the objective function with respect to the
optimization parameters is not directly available [4]. Consider
the problem of minimizing a loss function 퐿(x) which is
a scalar measure of the system performance and x is a 푝-
dimensional vector containing the parameters to be optimized.
SPSA is an iterative optimization method that contains three
main steps:
1) In each iteration 푘, generate some random perturbation
vector 휹푘in the following form
(푘+ 1)훾,
where 푐and 훾are constant parameters, and Δ푘is a ran-
dom vector whose elements are independently generated
from some probability distribution.
2) Obtain two noisy measurements of the loss function
퐿(ˆx푘+ 휹푘) and 퐿(ˆx푘−휹푘). The gradient of the loss
function is approximated by
ˆ푔(ˆx푘) = 퐿(ˆx푘+ 휹푘) −퐿(ˆx푘−휹푘)
3) Update the estimated parameter by
ˆx푘+1 = ˆx푘−푎푘ˆ푔(ˆx푘),
where 푎푘is the step size (sequence gain).
When the parameters are appropriately chosen following the
guidelines in [4], this iterative algorithm will effectively con-
verge to a local optimum point.
III. SPSA-BASED SUCCESSIVE RECEIVE BEAMFORMING
Existing applications of the SPSA method for SatCom
systems with phased arrays usually consider approximating
the gradient of the received signal power subject to the phase
shifts. For the case with a uniform linear array, an SPSA-
based receive beamforming algorithm is proposed in [6] by
considering phase-domain perturbation. The extension of this
method to a two-dimensional UPA is not straightforward,
because the phase difference between the received signals at
two neighboring antennas is not always proportional to the
distance between them. Another problem with the SPSA-based
method is that the algorithm performance is strongly affected
by the initial antenna weights. All the related works have to
assume that the real DoA angles 훼and 훽are very small, or
the initial beam direction is very close to the satellite direction
[6], [11]. Otherwise, the algorithm might converge to a local
optimum point within the side lobes instead of the main lobe
in the radiation pattern of the antenna array.
To resolve this problem, we propose a successive beam-
forming algorithm using the angle-domain SPSA method and
consider the DoA angles as the optimization parameters. The
key design point is to choose a subset of antennas to apply the
SPSA-based beamforming algorithm, and gradually increase
the number of antennas being utilized to improve the accuracy
of the beam pointing direction. Compared to the existing
designs, our proposed design is much less sensitive to the
initial antenna weights, which makes it more robust under
realistic conditions.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A. Angle Domain Successive SPSA
Let 횽= [훼, 훽] be the parameter vector to be estimated,
and 휹= [훿1, 훿2] be the perturbation vector in each iteration.
We deﬁne the following function of the DoA angles and the
antenna index (푚, 푛):
푓(훼, 훽, 푚, 푛) = exp
푗2휋푑푓푐
(푚−1) sin 훼cos 훽
+(푛−1) sin 훼sin 훽
The successive SPSA algorithm works as follows.
1) Initialization. Set the initial estimated angle vector as
ˆ횽0 = [훼0, 훽0].
2) Antenna sub-array selection. For the 푙-th global iter-
ation, choose a sub-array of 푀푙× 푁푙antennas, where
1 < 푀푙≤푀, 1 < 푁푙≤푁, 푀푙> 푀푙−1 and 푁푙> 푁푙−1.
The corresponding antenna weights are obtained by
w(푚, 푛)
푓(훼0, 훽0, 푚, 푛), ∀푚
= {1, . . . , 푀푙}, 푛=
{1, . . . , 푁푙}. Then, within the 푙-th global iteration, run
퐾local iterations of stochastic approximation with per-
turbed parameters.
3) Stochastic Approximation. For each local iteration 푘=
1, . . . , 퐾, set the perturbation vector as
(푘+ 1)Ω · [푥1, 푥2],
where 푥1, 푥2 ∈{+1, −1} are binary variables with equal
probability 1/2, 푏and Ω are constant parameters cho-
sen by following the guidelines in [4]. The estimated
gradient of the received signal power is
ˆ푔( ˆ횽푘) = 푃( ˆ횽푘+ 휹푘) −푃( ˆ횽푘−휹푘)
(10)
The received signal power with the perturbed angle
vector is measured by setting the antenna weight at the
(푚, 푛)-th element as w(푚, 푛) = 푓( ˜훼, ˜훽, 푚, 푛). where ˜훼
and ˜훽are the perturbed DoA angles, corresponding to
the ﬁrst and second elements in ˆ횽푘± 휹푘, respectively.
4) Adjust the estimated angle vector in the next iteration:
ˆ횽푘+1 = ˆ횽푘+ 휂푘ˆ푔( ˆ횽푘),
(11)
where 휂푘= 푎/(휁+ 푘) 휉is the step size, with 푎and 휉
being priorly chosen parameters.1
5) Update the antenna weight at the (푚, 푛)-th element by
w(푚, 푛) = 푓( ˆ훼, ˆ훽, 푚, 푛), where ˆ훼= ˆ횽푘+1(1) and ˆ훽=
ˆ횽푘+1(2) are the estimated DoA angles for the next local
iteration.
6) After executing steps (3−5) 퐾times, the estimated DoA
ˆ훼, ˆ훽in the last local iteration will be returned to step
2, as the initial DoA angles for the next global iteration
with increased size of the sub-array.
7) Repeat this procedure until the termination criterion is
satisﬁed, e.g., |푃( ˆ횽푘+1) −푃( ˆ횽푘)| < 휖, where 휖is a
pre-deﬁned threshold.
1Note that the plus sign in (11) is because the objective is to maximize the
received signal power instead of minimize it.
B. Modiﬁed One-Point SPSA
Though SPSA is a very powerful method for derivative-free
multivariate optimization problems, in a practical communica-
tion system, two different measurements can never been done
simultaneously in the strict sense. Only when the environment
remains unchanged while two measurements are obtained
sequentially, these two measurements can be approximately
considered as simultaneous.
A one-point form of the SPSA method is proposed in
[13], where only one noisy measurement is required in each
iteration. Recall that for the perturbation vector deﬁned in (9),
푥1, 푥2 ∈{+1, −1} are binary variables with equal probabilities.
The perturbation vector has four discrete directions, which are
[+1, +1], [+1, −1], [−1, +1], and [−1, −1]. Due to the random
perturbation direction, it is possible that the perturbation is
set toward undesired direction consecutively in many itera-
tions, which results in longer convergence time. We propose
a modiﬁed one-point SPSA algorithm which combines the
advantages of the two-point and one-point SPSA methods.
The new algorithm takes only one noisy measurement in each
iteration, while the perturbation direction is set to be cyclic.
Based on the original successive SPSA algorithm described in
Section III-A, the main differences are as follows.
• At each local iteration 푘= 1, . . . , 퐾, we set the perturba-
tion vector by (9), where [푥1, 푥2] periodically takes values
from {[+1, +1], [+1, −1], [−1, +1], [−1, −1]} in a cyclic
way. The antenna weights are adjusted by w(푚, 푛) =
푓( ˜훼, ˜훽, 푚, 푛) with
˜훼= ˆ횽푘(1) + 휹푘(1)
˜훽= ˆ횽푘(2) + 휹푘(2)
(12)
One measurement of the received signal power ˜푃푘is
obtained with the new antenna weights.
• The estimated gradient of the received signal power is
ˆ푔( ˆ횽푘) =
˜푃푘−˜푃푘−1
휹푘−휹푘−1
(13)
where ˜푃푘= 푃( ˜Φ푘) with ˜Φ푘= [ ˜훼, ˜훽]. If the value of
푥1 in iteration 푘is the same as in iteration 푘−1, then
the ﬁrst element of ˆ푔( ˆ횽푘) is set to be zero to avoid an
inﬁnite-valued element in ˆ푔( ˆ횽푘). The same rule applies
for the value of 푥2 and the second element of ˆ푔( ˆ횽푘).
IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
In this section, we present and compare the performance of
the proposed algorithms by performing Matlab-based simula-
tions. We consider an UPA with 8 × 8 antennas, with uniform
antenna spacing 푑= 휆푐/2 = 0.75 cm, where 휆푐= 푐/ 푓푐is the
wavelength at carrier frequency 푓푐= 20 GHz. The parameters
in the SPSA algorithm are chosen as 푎= 8 × 10−6, 푏= 휋/18,
Ω = 0.101, 휁= 0.602, which follow the guidelines in [4].
The signal-to-noise ratio at the receiver side is 20 dB. In the
initialization step, the estimated DoA angles are 훼0 = 0◦and
훽0 = 0◦. We consider the normalized received signal power
(NRSP) as the performance metric, which is the ratio between
the received signal power and the maximum power that can
be achieved in the optimal case.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Number of iterations
NRSP
SPSA-two
SPSA-one
(a) The DoA angles are 훼= 8◦and 훽= 6◦.
Number of iterations
NRSP
SPSA-two
SPSA-one
(b) The DoA angles are 훼= 6◦and 훽= 8◦.
Fig. 1: Performance comparison between the two-point and
one-point SPSA algorithms without successive sub-array se-
lection.
For the ease of illustration, we name the proposed algo-
rithms as follows.
• SPSA-two: the original two-point SPSA algorithm de-
scribed in Section III-A.
• SPSA-one: the modiﬁed one-point SPSA algorithm de-
scribed in Section III-B
In Fig. 1, we show the NRSP performance of the two-point
and one-point SPSA algorithms without successive sub-array
selection. Depending on the speciﬁc DoA angles, one-point
SPSA might achieve slightly better or worse performance
than the two-point algorithm. However, the main advantage
of the one-point SPSA method lies in the fact that only one
measurement instead of two is required in each iteration.
Considering this effect, we conclude that the modiﬁed one-
point SPSA algorithm achieves comparable performance as
the two-point version with only half of the measurements.
As mentioned at the beginning of Section III, the perfor-
mance of SPSA-based receive beamforming algorithms can be
strongly affected by the initial DoA angles 훼0 and 훽0. In Fig.
2, we show one example where the original SPSA algorithms
(without successive sub-array selection) fail to converge to the
optimal point. This happens when the real DoA angles are too
far from the initial beam direction. In this case, SPSA-based
algorithms can only converge to the nearest local optimum in
the side lobes instead of the main lobe.
In Fig. 3, we show the NRSP of the successive SPSA-based
receive beamforming algorithm. For the ﬁrst six iterations, a
sub-array of dimension 2 × 2 is selected. Then the selected
sub-array increases to 4 × 4 for the next six iterations. At last,
Number of iterations
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
NRSP
SPSA-two
SPSA-one
Fig. 2: NSRP of the two-point and one-point SPSA algorithms
without successive sub-array selection. The real DoA angles
are 훼= 20◦and 훽= 15◦.
Number of iterations
NRSP
sub-array
Fig. 3: Performance of the one-point SPSA algorithm with
successive sub-array selection. The real DoA angles are 훼=
20◦and 훽= 15◦.
the full antenna array is utilized. The NRSP is obtained as
the receive signal power divided by the maximum received
signal power with 8 × 8 full antenna array. For this reason,
the NRSP values obtained with 2 × 2 and 4 × 4 sub-arrays are
much smaller than the case with 8 × 8 array. We see that with
the same DoA angles as in Fig. 2, our proposed successive
beamforming algorithm can still converge to the global optimal
point. This result shows that the successive sub-array selection
technique can improve the robustness and effectiveness of the
SPSA-based receive beamforming algorithms.
V. CONCLUSIONS
In this work, we proposed two receive beamforming algo-
rithms using the SPSA method and successive antenna sub-
array selection for mobile satellite receivers equipped with
a two-dimensional phased array. The proposed algorithms
were shown to be robust and efﬁcient at ﬁnding the optimal
beamforming coefﬁcients, especially when the DoA angles of
the satellite signals are relatively large.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

REFERENCES
[1] E. Del Re and L. Pierucci, “Next-generation mobile satellite networks,”
IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 40, no. 9, pp. 150–159, 2002.
[2] J. C. Spall, “A stochastic approximation technique for generating
maximum likelihood parameter estimates,” in 1987 American Control
Conference.
IEEE, 1987, pp. 1161–1167.
[3] J. C. Spall, “Multivariate stochastic approximation using a simultaneous
perturbation gradient approximation,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic
Control, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 332–341, 1992.
[4] J. C. Spall, “Implementation of the simultaneous perturbation algorithm
for stochastic optimization,” IEEE Transactions on aerospace and elec-
tronic systems, vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 817–823, 1998.
[5] E. Ramírez-Llanos and S. Martínez, “Stochastic source seeking for
mobile robots in obstacle environments via the SPSA method,” IEEE
Transactions on Automatic Control, vol. 64, no. 4, pp. 1732–1739, 2019.
[6] F. G. Zhang, W. M. Jia, W. Jin, and M. L. Yao, “Beamforming algorithm
based on SPSA for mobile satellite receiver,” Electronics Letters, vol. 48,
no. 22, pp. 1379 –1380, October 2012.
[7] M. Fakharzadeh, S. H. Jamali, P. Mousavi, and S. Safavi-Naeini, “Fast
beamforming for mobile satellite receiver phased arrays: Theory and
experiment,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 57,
no. 6, pp. 1645–1654, June 2009.
[8] Chen Sun, A. Hirata, T. Ohira, and N. C. Karmakar, “Fast beamforming
of electronically steerable parasitic array radiator antennas: theory and
experiment,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 52,
no. 7, pp. 1819–1832, July 2004.
[9] P. Mousavi, M. Fakharzadeh, S. H. Jamali, K. Narimani, M. Hossu,
H. Bolandhemmat, G. Raﬁ, and S. Safavi-Naeini, “A low-cost ultra low
proﬁle phased array system for mobile satellite reception using zero-
knowledge beamforming algorithm,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas
and Propagation, vol. 56, no. 12, pp. 3667–3679, 2008.
[10] M. Hossu, S. H. Jamali, P. Mousavi, K. Narimani, M. Fakharzadeh,
and S. Safavi-Naeini, “Zero-knowledge adaptive beamforming using
analog signal processor for satellite tracking applications with an ex-
perimental comparison to a digital implementation,” IEEE Transactions
on Aerospace and Electronic Systems, vol. 46, no. 3, pp. 1533–1543,
2010.
[11] J. Zhao, F. Gao, Q. Wu, S. Jin, Y. Wu, and W. Jia, “Beam tracking
for UAV mounted SatCom on-the-move with massive antenna array,”
IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 36, no. 2, pp.
363–375, 2018.
[12] V. Raj and S. Kalyani, “Backpropagating through the air: Deep learn-
ing at physical layer without channel models,” IEEE Communications
Letters, vol. 22, no. 11, pp. 2278–2281, 2018.
[13] J. C. Spall, “A one-measurement form of simultaneous perturbation
stochastic approximation,” Automatica, vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 109–112,
1997.