Active deployable primary mirrors on CubeSat 
Noah Schwartz1, Maria Milanova1, William Brzozowski1, Stephen Todd1, Zeshan Ali1, 
Lucie Buron2, Jean-François-Sauvage2, 3, Charlotte Bond1, Heather Bruce1, Phil Rees1, 
Marc Ferrari2, Donald MacLeod1 
1UK Astronomy Technology Centre 
Blackford Hill, Edinburgh EH9 3HJ, United Kingdom. Mail: noah.schwartz@stfc.ac.uk  
2Laboratoroire d’Astrophysique de Marseille 
Aix Marseille Univ, CNRS, CNES, LAM, Marseille, France;  
3ONERA 
29 avenue de la Division Leclerc, 92322 Châtillon, France;  
Abstract: The volume available on small satellites restricts the size of optical apertures to a few 
centimetres, limiting the Ground-Sampling Distance (GSD) in the visible to typically 3 m at 500 km. We 
present in this paper the latest development of a laboratory demonstrator of a segmented deployable 
telescope that will triple the achievable ground resolution and improve photometric capability of CubeSat 
imagers. Each mirror segment is folded for launch and unfolds in space. We demonstrate through laboratory 
validation very high deployment repeatability of the mirrors <±5 µm. To enable diffraction-limited 
imaging, segments are controlled in piston, tip, and tilt. This is achieved by an initial coarse alignment of 
the mirrors followed by a fine phasing step. Finally, we investigate the impact of the thermal environment 
on high-order wavefront error and the conceptual design of a deployable secondary fitting inside 1U. 
INTRODUCTION  
To fully exploit EO data, many commercial and scientific applications (e.g. Earth climate 
monitoring, natural disasters, defence and security) require very high-resolution images 
and as often as possible. However, combining both high spatial and temporal resolutions 
is, at the moment, out of reach at reasonable costs. Indeed, both requirements can only be 
achieved simultaneously by using multiple satellites in a LEO (Low Earth Orbit) 
constellation, which requires small individual satellites to lower costs. However, using 
small platforms (e.g. CubeSat) constrains the size of optical apertures, limiting the 
achievable spatial resolution. For instance, a 10 cm diameter telescope (typical maximum 
aperture on a 6U CubeSat) provides only 3 m resolution images from a 500 km orbit in 
visible wavelength (500 nm) due to the diffraction limit. Developing an optical aperture 
greater than 10 cm on a CubeSat represents a major opto-mechanical challenge. 
In this paper, we present an innovative design for packaging (i.e. fitting inside the 
CubeSat volume), deploying, and controlling the position of the primary mirror of a 
segment space telescope. Each mirror segments is adjusted in piston, tip, and tilt (PTT) 
to reach the diffraction-limit of the telescope. We report on the development of a 
laboratory experimental setup to validate the deployment and alignment of the primary 
mirror (M1) segments. We also report, on preliminary studies investigating the impact of 
the thermal environment on high-order wavefront errors (not correctable by PTT), and on 
the conceptual design of a deployable secondary mirror that fits into a 1U volume when 
stowed. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

METER RESOLUTION FROM DEPLOYABLE TELESCOPE 
Deployable CubeSat 
UK ATC’s deployable 6U CubeSat will provide a 1 m ground resolution from LEO with 
a 30 cm optical aperture that can be deployed and aligned in space (diffraction-limit being 
0.8 m at 500 km for a 500 nm wavelength) [1, 2]. Figure 1 indicate the currently 
unexploited region in terms of mass and ground resolution addressed by this work. By 
using a constellation of satellites, taking advantage of the cost reduction, it is possible to 
lower the waiting time between observations of a given ground scene. 
Figure 1: Image ground resolution (GSD) versus 
satellite mass and swath (bubble size) for deployable 
CubeSat and a selection of major satellites already in 
orbit.  
Figure 2: Simplified illustration of the payload 
concept: deployable structures (primary & secondary 
mirrors, baffle), actuators to adjust mirror positions, 
sensors to measure mirror positions, detector to assess 
image quality, and on-board computer to optimise 
mirror positions & image quality (i.e. active optics). 
UK ATC’s prototype provides a first demonstrator for a new payload technology: a 
standalone and automated deployable telescope dedicated to optical imaging. On a 
conceptual level (see Figure 2), deployable optical telescopes are composed of a primary 
mirror (M1, principal light-gathering surface), a secondary mirror (M2, folding light 
towards the detector), a baffle to stop unwanted light, and an active optics [AO] control 
to guarantee final optical quality. Finally, it often requires field correcting optics to 
compensate for field-dependent aberrations. Active and adaptive control of segmented 
primary mirrors a key enabling technology for space-based science (e.g. for instruments 
such as MIRI [3] on the James Webb Space Telescope) and for ground-based astronomy 
[4, 5]. Transposing this technology to the CubeSat market represents a major innovation. 
First error budget of a deployable CubeSat telescope 
The mechanical repeatability of deployable structures is typically of the order of a few 
microns [1, 6]. To reach diffraction-limited performance (defined as λ/14) in the visible 
(500 nm), the total aberration level needs to be below approx. ≤35 nm. We incorporate to 
our system an active correction to compensate for static and slowly-varying aberrations. 
Actuators (Figure 2) provide movement to the optical surfaces in piston, tip, and tilt. Their 
extension must be greater than the deployment repeatability (i.e. several microns), and 
their resolution smaller than the allowable errors (i.e. tens of nm or less) [2].  
On top of the M1 and M2 AO phasing residuals, error sources may also degrade the final 
resolution. These errors include the intrinsic optical quality (manufacturing, polishing 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

errors), alignment (during MAIT, launch vibrations, thermal deformations), segment-
related residual errors (differential piston, tip, and tilt, scalloping). Following [7], we set 
the requirement for each of the independent individual aberration contributors to ≤15 nm. 
Further system-level analysis would be required to define correlations between these error 
terms and refine their relative weight.  
In order to reach this level of performance, we split the phasing process into 3 main steps. 
The first step consists in the initial deployment of the telescope in orbit from a folded and 
stowed configuration to a configuration in which the mirror segments are fully deployed. 
After deployment, the image (e.g. a PSF) should fall within the detector field of view, or 
better than 15 mrad for a 1° field of view detector. This precision is entirely achievable 
as demonstrated by the HighRes prototype [1, 2, 8]. The second step consists in a coarse 
phasing of the segments, orientating them towards the same light of sight. Several method 
have been investigate successfully in laboratory and simulations: using capacitive sensors 
or alternatively a blog detection algorithm. The final step consists in the fine phasing of 
the segments, where segments are co-phased to create a diffraction-limited optical system. 
For fine phasing results using image sharpness and phase diversity see [7, 8]. 
M1 PROTOTYPE DESIGN AND LABORATORY EXPERIMENTATION 
The prototype presented in this paper focuses on the main challenges: packaging, 
deploying, and aligning M1. For the purpose of the demonstrator, we limited the payload 
volume for M1 to 1.5U, other elements such as the secondary mirror, baffle, detector, etc. 
taking up the remaining of the 4U volume. A modular integration of the CubeSat systems 
was developed for the prototype laboratory demonstrator. This allowed easy access to all 
the various components for inspection, alignment and modification during the test 
programme. All structures are predominantly aluminium (including the mirrors) to ensure 
any differential thermal contraction effects are minimised.  
Figure 3: (Left) The optical design. Cassegrain telescope with a lens assembly to set the correct focal length 
and to provide aberration correction across the field-of-view (FoV). (Right) Overview of the mechanical 
design of the prototype CubeSat. Left: folded form for launch, fitting into a 1.5U volume. Right: 
deployed state reached after launch, deploying a 300 mm optical aperture. 
The deployment motion is provided by an extension spring. It is mounted on a short lever 
arm that is designed to produce zero torque on the deployment axis when the mirror is in 
its final position. This is important so that the spring does not interfere with the tip-tilt 
adjustments on the mirror. Spring deployment mechanisms can cause undesirable shock 
or vibration issues when released. These undamped motions can cause repeatability issues 
in precision mechanisms. To prevent this from happening the mirror motion is controlled 
by the use of a case Nitinol wire [9] Shape Memory Alloy (SMA). 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Three motors enable each mirror to be further manipulated in tip, tilt and piston. The 
motor chosen for this application is the Newport 8354 Tiny Picomotor. They have a 
30 nm positioning resolution, a high actuation force (13 N), and have the ability to hold 
position while powered off. 
PRIMIRAY MIRROR DEPLOYMENT AND WAVEFRONT CONTROL  
Initial deployment 
In order to produce a high optical quality, the mirrors 
need to be deployed with adequate repeatability and 
precision. To test the deployment performance, the 
mirrors were retracted and deployed into their 
kinematic mounts 500 times. Each time the mirror 
settled into its mount and a reading from 3 commercial 
off-the-self high-precision MicroEpsilon CapaNCDT 
CSE05 capacitive sensors was taken. Figure 4 shows 
the distribution of the measurement data for each 
sensor. The red line shows a normal distribution fit to 
the data with mean subtracted. From the figure it can 
be seen that in all instances the 2σ variation (95% confidence) around the mean is well 
within our required repeatability tolerance. 
Coarse phasing: close-loop control 
For the coarse alignment, we use ZED-CAP [10] capacitive sensors in conjunction with 
the PicoMotor actuators to drive the mirrors into the desired position. We implemented 
an integrator control law: 𝑢𝑛+1 = 𝑢𝑛−𝑔𝑀𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑙𝑠𝑘, where Mcontrol is the control matrix, 
g is the uniform scalar gain set to a small value, un is the PicoMotors control vector at 
iteration step n, and sk is the capacitive sensor measurements. Mcontrol is calculated from 
the generalised pseudo-inverse of the interaction matrix which itself is measured by 
recording the response on the position sensors of each motor sequentially. Figure 5 shows 
the 3 capacitive channel measurements taken from one of the four mirrors.  
Figure 5: (Left) error as measured from the 3 displacement sensor channels as a function of iteration step. 
(Right) 4 individual PSFs before alignment; inset showing PSF aligned but not yet co-phased. 
After an initial very fast convergence (here plotted with a low gain value to see 
convergence), the active optics loop appears to struggle to bring the error down below 
10-20 nm, with noticeable oscillations. This has been identified to come mainly from the 
actuators used to drive the mirrors into position, and not the sensors themselves. In spite 
of the limited motor step size of approx. 30 nm, hysteresis and backlash (in addition to 
Figure 4: Deployment repeatability 
histograms of a sensor. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

some limited amount of stiction in the system itself), we are able to converge to a final 
error <5 nm. This is below our requirement of 15 nm per mirror segment degree of 
freedom to reach diffraction-limited performance. It is important at this point to note that 
an initial calibration step is required to measure the absolute datum (i.e. reference mirror 
position for which perfect alignment is achieved). These positions are then used in the 
close loop operation as the reference. 
Coarse phase: blob detection 
As an alternative strategy to using the on-board sensors we propose the use of a blob 
detection algorithm to perform the coarse phasing step. This method has the advantage of 
only relying on the detector images (i.e. where the final optical quality is required) 
without the need of a mechanical reference. In the blob detection algorithm, each petal is 
dithered individually using a small motor movement and a new image is taken (see Figure 
6 and Figure 7). The difference between the new and previous image is computed. Finally, 
the PSF which belongs to the petal is identified and the petal is moved accordingly to 
align the PSF with the centre of the field of view. Preliminary simulation results show 
that tip-tilt (i.e. optical alignment) can be achieved with very high accuracy, with tip-tilt 
residuals of 50 nm RMS on average for bright stars. Five images are necessary to compute 
the differential images for the 4 petals, with a final image after alignment used for 
validation. Increased stability and robustness in terms of linear behaviour of the actuators 
or field distortions can be obtained by using small gain values, which would require more 
images. This leads to a trade-off between the number of image required and the final 
performance. 
Figure 6: Principle of blob detection in differential 
image. 
Figure 7: Tip-tilt residual after correction as a function 
of flux (RON=10 & single iteration alignment). 
Preliminary thermal analysis 
Objective of this preliminary work is to study the thermal behaviour of the CubeSat in a 
representative LEO environment. The heat sources represented by Earth, Sun, and on-
board elements create changing thermal gradients across the satellite structure and mirror 
petals. These gradients translate into mechanical deformations which in turn translate into 
optical aberrations. In particular, we want to evaluate two sources of deformation: the 
controllable deformation (i.e. Piston, Tip, and Tilt) to improve the AO control scheme, 
and high-order aberrations that are not in the controllable space. Our top-level 
requirement is to maintain the total high-order WFE (wavefront error) below 40 nm RMS. 
We conducted an analysis of the internal deformation of the mirror, for a normalised value 
of ΔT = 1K between the polished and rear face of the aluminium petal, using and end-to-
end simulation tool (Nastran/Patran). This showed a curvature of 14 μm PV, twice the 
mechanical deformation. This deformation is well understood by considering a uniform 
plate deformation and the relationship: Sag = CTE x ThermalGradient x L2 / (2 x width). 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Figure 8 shows the extrapolated trend of the expected high-order optical aberrations for 
different materials and thermal gradients, using the linear relationship to CTE and ΔT. 
Keeping the high-order contribution below 40 nm RMS (approx. 100 nm PV) can be 
reached by decreasing the thermal gradient (using MLI and baffles) and with low CTE 
materials. The ceramic-based materials (e.g. cordierite) are a promising solution up to 
ΔT = 10K. The next steps of this analysis is to build a thermal model of the satellite (incl. 
main structure, secondary mirror, baffle & solar panel) to estimate thermal gradients and 
the time-evolution in a realistic environment. Finally, we will couple this analysis to 
simulations of a realistic active optics control to show the final correction capacity.  
Figure 8: (Left) High order wavefront error of the petal; dependence of the CTE and thermal. (Right top) 
Example of Nastran/Patran E2E modeling for 1 mirror segment deformation. (Right bottom) Wavefront 
error for Piston, Tip, & Tilt only and remaining high-orders.  
DEPLOYABLE SECONDARY MIRROR 
Optical sensitivity for deployable CubeSats 
The analysis of the optical design presented in section 2 showed that the optical tolerances 
were very tight. This is also true for the position of the secondary mirror M2. In order to 
analyse the sensitivity of M2 to misalignments, we investigate the impact of Defocus (i.e. 
a movement along the optical Z-axis), Decentre (i.e. a movement along the X/Y plane), 
and Tilt (a rotation around the X/Y axis) on aberration levels. After modelling and 
analysis, we set the M2 optical diameter to 50 mm to avoid vignetting and excessive mass. 
Both M1 and M2 have non-spherical surfaces. Because of symmetry, a rotation around 
the Z-axis has not impact on image quality. 
Figure 9 shows the relative change in RMS wavefront error (WFE), which is subtracted 
from the RMS WFE of the nominal model (negligible even when using a simple field 
corrector designed with only a couple lenses). It shows the impact of defocus on final 
optical aberrations for 3 different M1-M2 distances (300, 400, and 500 mm), assuming 
the use of a field corrector. Unsurprisingly, increasing the M1-M2 separation helps 
reducing the sensitivity to defocus (i.e. we can tolerate larger defocus values). The 3 
horizontal lines, represent respectively the diffraction-limit (i.e. 36 nm), the requirement 
(12 nm), and a goal (9 nm). For a M1-M2 separation of 300 mm, a defocus of ≤0.7 μm 
would still enable diffraction-limited imaging. This appears below the achievable 
precision of a single-use deployment system and would in practice require a fine 
movement actuator or stage to reach this value. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A similar analysis was performed on M2 decentre and tip-tilt (data not shown). This again 
demonstrates the need for large M1-M2 distance to reduce sensitivity, and shows that a 
decentre below ≤10 μm and a tip-tilt of ΔrX = ΔrY < ±0.28 mrad would still enable the 
system to reach the diffraction-limit. It is possible to slightly relax the tolerances by 
having actuation control in tip/tilt on top of having control of decofus.  
Figure 9: Impact of defocus on final optical aberrations for 3 different M1-M2 distances. 
Preliminary conceptual design 
Nearly every design reviewed for this study utilises a reflective optical system and 
typically a variant of a Cassegrain layout (see for example [11, 12]). This design offers a 
large aperture and focal length by folding the light path within the CubeSat volume. In 
addition to deploying the primary mirror (M1) 
to increase the photometric power and angular 
resolution, there is a need to package and 
deploy the secondary mirror (M2) to 
minimize volume during launch and increase 
the focal length. As we have seen, increasing 
M1-M2 distance can have a dramatic effect 
on misalignment sensitivity. 
A trade-off study had shown telescopic 
booms to be most promising, see Figure 10. 
The deployment stages are attached to each 
other rigidly and semi-kinematically. They 
are secured with SMA for launch. The 
telescopic booms use preloaded springs and 
fine motion actuators for piston, tip/tilt 
control. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper we presented a concept for a high-resolution Earth Observation CubeSat 
using a deployable primary mirrors. A laboratory opto-mechanical prototype of this 
concept was developed and discussed in this paper. We demonstrated the feasibility of 
having a segmented primary mirror that can be deployed; its position measured and 
manipulated with the level of accuracy required for co-phasing in the visible. The primary 
mirror prototype was packaged within a 1.5U CubeSat volume. We validated that we can 
Figure 10: Deployable M2- preliminary 
conceptual design. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

deploy the mirror segments with a repeatability of less than ±4.5 μm (typically less than 
±3 μm). We demonstrated that the position of the mirrors, using the capacitive sensors 
and the linear piezo actuators, can be adjusted to within ≤10 nm of their optimal position; 
an accuracy sufficient to achieve diffraction-limited performance. Finally, we presented 
a sensitivity analysis of M2 misalignments, demonstrated that they are well within reach 
of current technology developed for phasing M1 segments, and proposed a conceptual 
design to deploy M2 using only a 1U volume. 
The severe volume constrains - limited to 1.5U in our prototype version for fitting M1 - 
leads us to now consider a larger 4U alternative for the entire payload, which opens up 
new avenues in terms of opto-mechanical packaging, deployment strategies, and active 
optics correction. Using this larger volume, we now need to develop the concept further 
to reduce complexity (e.g. the number of active components), and take into account the 
volume for additional subsystems. Performance was also limited by the actuators used in 
the demonstrator, we are currently testing new COTS actuators. The conceptual design of 
M2 and baffle needs to be advanced further. Particular design emphasis will be placed on 
the deployment mechanisms and their accuracies, the resolution of the actuator 
mechanisms (required reach optimal optical quality), and future flight compatibility. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Schwartz, N., et al., “A segmented deployable primary mirror for earth observation from a CubeSat 
platform,” in Proc. AIAA/USU Conf. Small Satellite, vol. SSC16, p. SSC16–WK–23 (2016). 
[2] Schwartz, N., et al., “Laboratory demonstration of an active optics system for high-resolution 
deployable CubeSat,” in 4S Symposium, vol. 1, pp. 1–15 (2018). 
[3] Wells, M., et al. “The Mid-Infrared Instrument for the James Webb Space Telescope, VI: The 
Medium Resolution Spectrometer.” Publications of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific, vol. 127, 
no. 953, 2015, pp. 646–664. 
[4] Schwartz, N., et al., “Sensing and control of segmented mirrors with a pyramid wavefront sensor 
in the presence of spiders,” in Proc. AO4ELT5 (2017). 
[5] Schwartz, N., et al., “Analysis and mitigation of pupil discontinuities on adaptive optics 
performance,” Proc. SPIE10703, 1070322 (2018). 
[6] Villalba, V., et al., “Review on thermal and mechanical challenges in the development of 
deployable space optics,” J. Astron. Telesc. Instrum. Syst. 6(1), 010902 (2020). 
[7] Sauvage, J.-F., et al. “First error budget of a deployable CubeSat telescope,” Proc. SPIE 11443, 
2020. https://doi.org/10.1117/12.2561697 
[8] Schwartz N., et al., "High-resolution deployable CubeSat prototype," Proc. SPIE 11443, 2020. 
https://doi.org/10.1117/12.2562255 
[9] Patent “A moveable joint” (granted 10 June 2020). 
[10] Razorbill 
Instruments 
<https://razorbillinstruments.com/zed-cap-a-compact-high-precision-
displacement-sensor/> (30 October 2020). 
[11] Gooding, D., et al. “A novel deployable telescope to facilitate a low-cost <1m GSD video rapid-
revisit small satellite constellation.” International Conference on Space Optics—ICSO 2018. Vol. 
11180. International Society for Optics and Photonics, (2019). 
[12] Allthorpe-Mullis, E., et al. “Cubesat camera: A low cost imaging system for CubeSat platforms.” 
Proceedings of iCubeSat (2018). 