Sah et al 
[35th] Annual 
Small Satellite Conference 
[SSC21-P1-23] 
Constellation Design of Remote Sensing Small Satellite for Infrastructure Monitoring in 
India 
Roshan Sah, Raunak Srivastava, Kaushik Das 
TCS Research 
Bangalore, India; +919933422226  
sah.roshan@tcs.com 
ABSTRACT 
A constellation of remote sensing small satellite system has been developed for infrastructure monitoring in India by 
using Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) Payload. The low earth orbit (LEO) constellation of the small satellites is 
designed in a way, which can cover the entire footprint of India. Since India lies a little above the equatorial region, 
the orbital parameters are adjusted in a way that inclination of 36 degrees and RAAN varies from 70-130 degrees at 
a height of 600 km has been considered. A total number of 4 orbital planes are designed in which each orbital plane 
consisting 3 small satellites with 120-degrees true anomaly separation. Each satellite is capable of taking multiple 
look images with the minimum resolution of 1 meter per pixel and swath width of 10 km approx. The multiple look 
images captured by the SAR payload help in continuous infrastructure monitoring of our interested footprint area in 
India. To support the mission, each small satellite is supplied with earth sensors, sun sensors, GPS to accurately 
determine its position and attitude, and Control Moment Gyro (CMGs) which is capable of high slew rate maneuver 
with precise pointing at minimum power utilization. Further, each small satellite is equipped with a communication 
payload that uses X-band and VHF antenna, whereas the TT&C will use a high data-rate S-band transmitter. The 
satellite requires a powerful set of batteries to operate along with an origami-designed solar panel with the 
implementation of GaN-FETs to improve the performance and efficiency of solar power conversion. The paper 
presents only a coverage metrics analysis method of our designed constellation for our India footprint by 
considering the important metrics like revisit time, response time, and coverage efficiency. The data processing for 
the captured images is not presented here. The result shows that the average revisits time for our constellation ranges 
from about 15- 35 min which is less than an hour and the average response time for this iteratively designed 
constellation ranges from about 25-120 min along with hundred percent coverage efficiency most of the time. 
Finally, it was concluded that each satellite has 70kg of total mass and costs around $ 0.75M to develop.   
INTRODUCTION 
In the twentieth first century, small satellite technology 
has played an impactful role in the development of 
space disruptive technology. The technology trends 
have made an important advancement in small satellites 
within the range of 1-500 kg weight. The small satellite 
are mainly classified as Femto (<0.1kg), Pico (0.1-1 
kg), Nano (1-10 kg), Micro (10-100 kg) and Mini (100-
satellite. 
Numerous 
space 
technology 
companies from different countries have been started 
working related to different payload applications in 
small satellite setup which will be changing the space 
economy exponentially. It has been found that the 
global small satellite market will grow from 2.8 to 7.8 
billion dollars by the end of 2025 as updated by the 
small satellite market report [1]. Mostly, Nano-satellite 
and micro-satellites have been used for testing, 
experimenting, and exploring new space hardware or 
software along with the new ideas at a minimum 
expense of money. In the nineteenth century, single 
spacecraft was enough to perform multiple missions in 
space, but recently, it can be seen that for some of the 
advanced space applications, the single spacecraft is not 
enough to fulfill the desired mission in space. To fulfill 
these requirements, a series of satellites working 
together can be used in the same or different orbit, 
known as "Satellite Constellation." 
In the recent decade, the satellite constellation idea has 
evolved broadly, with huge satellites operating in space 
to fulfill the required application demand. It is used to 
permanently provide communication facilities and 
global coverage at anytime, anywhere on the earth. 
There are lots of operating satellite constellation that 
are used for an application like navigation and 
positioning 
constellation 
(e.g., 
GPS, 
NAVIC, 
GLONASS, 
Galileo, 
BeiDou, 
QZSS, 
Etc.), 
communication 
(Global 
Xpress, 
Globalstar 
[2], 
European Aviation Network, Broadband  Global Area 
Network, O3b, Eutelsat, Thuraya, Etc.),  earth 
observation 
satellite 
constellation 
(RADARSAT 
Constellation, Planet Labs, Rapid Eyes, Disaster 
Monitoring Constellation, Spire, Etc.), remote sensing, 
Etc. The access to space is continuously increasing due 
to the design and technology miniaturization of large 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Sah et al 
[35th] Annual 
Small Satellite Conference 
satellites to small satellites and an increase in small 
satellites' launch rate from Femto to mini size [3]. 
Moreover, their constellation is getting tremendous 
attention these days for sustainable business purposes 
[4]. The upcoming decade is IoT, edge computing, 
weather 
science, 
disaster 
monitoring, 
safety/security, which will have the most significant 
potential and dependency in the satellite constellation 
development for the business purpose [5]. More than 
one hundred companies had made a proposal for a 
satellite constellation in different with different 
approaches in recent years. 
Nowadays, satellite constellation has become a 
powerful and effective tool for earth observation and 
remote sensing applications. Remote sensing is one of 
the most famous applications in satellite technology for 
the development of technology like infrastructure, 
disaster, weather, biodiversity, forestry, surface change, 
and agriculture monitoring purpose. Previously, most of 
the constellations used to be at Sun Synchronous Orbit 
(SSO) or High Earth Orbit (HEO) for remote sensing 
and earth observation with larger satellites. But in 
recent trends, most of the satellite constellation is often 
deployed at Low Earth Orbit (LEO), as the single 
satellite only covers certain small areas of the earth that 
orbit at higher angular velocity to maintain its orbit. 
Therefore, numerous LEO satellites are required to 
provide continuous permanent global coverage. In 
recent years, satellite constellations are continuously 
evolving as the industry market's business solution for 
providing global, regional coverage, and space 
research. The regional constellation satellite-like 
Indian, Regional Navigation Satellite System (IRNSS) 
[6], and Quasi-Zenith satellite [7] systems are 
continuously involved in providing the local region 
coverage to people.   As regional coverage mostly 
focuses on local area coverage, a small satellite system 
must provide the same performance per metric area 
compared to global constellation coverage.  Regional 
constellation performance leads to a reduced launch and 
design cost system, which is directly dependent on the 
number of satellites used [8]. 
In this paper, we will present our work in each section. 
section 
consists 
constellation 
design, 
preliminary sizing of the satellites, coverage quality 
measurement, results, and discussion of our simulated 
case and overall conclusion. The constellation design 
represents the iterative design procedure of selection of 
our orbital parameters and orbital plane, which will be 
capable of making overall coverage of our area of 
interest footprint. Whereas the preliminary sizing 
section represents the distribution of the mass and cost 
budget of each sub-system of the satellites and their 
selection of the optimal components required while 
making a full working satellite. This section also 
represents our SAR payload specification which is 
required to take multiple images while passing over 
India. The coverage quality measurement section 
explains the method of finding the different coverage 
metrics and mathematical models involved in it along 
with the importance of the coverage performance of our 
designed constellation. The image and data processing 
for the captured images is not presented in this paper as 
it will be done by other groups. The result and 
discussion section show the important results of some 
coverage metrics parameters which are required to 
evaluate the coverage performance of our constellation. 
Finally, all the section is concluded in the conclusion 
section. 
CONSTELLATION DESIGN 
The traditional way of designing the satellite 
constellation mainly focuses on minimizing the number 
of satellites to provide continuous broad area coverage.  
The design process mainly involves determining the 
typical characteristics of orbit and constellation patterns 
to generate the optimal constellation for complex 
coverage requirements. The classical constellation 
design method, like Rosette constellation [9], Walker 
constellation [10], and street of coverage [11], and 
tetrahedron elliptical constellation [12] which provides 
us the geometric design approach for uniform 
symmetric constellation pattern. The symmetric pattern 
provides a solid foundation for a fully optimized design 
space analysis to get an analytical solution due to the 
finite variability approach [13]. As the traditional 
constellation mostly assumes symmetric patterns and 
fully optimized common orbital characteristics, the 
spatial-varying and time-varying coverage requirements 
are completed missed in large, designed space. 
In this paper, we had presented LEO small satellite 
constellation design in an iterative way, which will be 
capable of capturing the entire footprint coverage of the 
India location in 24-hour duration.  Each small satellite 
consists of a SAR payload system which enables to 
capture of the footprint at each revisit to the India 
location. 
iterative 
design 
satellite 
constellation and orbital parameter were run on the AGI 
STK [14] tools by considering the SGP4 [15] orbital 
propagator to minimize the positional and attitude 
discrepancy. The selected orbital elements and the 
number of the satellite in each orbital plane are shown 
in Table 1.  
Since India lies a little above the equatorial region; the 
orbital parameters are adjusted with higher access time 
and coverage with an inclination of 36° and altitude of 
600 km. To make full coverage of the India footprint in 
24 hours, we had considered a total of 12 numbers of 
the small satellites with 4 different inclined orbital 
planes.  

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Sah et al 
[35th] Annual 
Small Satellite Conference 
Table1. Small Satellite Constellation Orbital 
Parameters. (Whereas G1, G2, G3, and G4 are the 
individual orbital planes.) 
Parameters 
Height 
600 km 
600 km 
600 km 
600 km 
Inclination (i) 
RAAN 
110° 
130° 
Satellites 
True Anomaly 
separation 
120° 
120° 
120° 
120° 
Each orbital plane consists of the 3 number of the 
satellite which was separated by 120 degrees of the true 
anomaly in an orbit. The RAAN varies from 70-130 
degrees across the plane with a difference of 20 degrees 
between the orbital planes. By considering mentioned 
orbital plane, each satellite will have at least 3 accesses 
to the India location. 
Figure 1: Small satellite constellation design 
visualization in 3D space. 
The schematic diagram of a small satellite constellation 
having 4 orbital planes with 3 satellites at each plane 
along with the India footprint is shown in figure 1 in 3D 
visualization which was generated by the means of STK 
tools. Figure 2 represents the ground track of the 
satellite to the India location along with the access 
coverage which is marked by the red color. 
Figure 2: Small satellite constellation coverage 
access in India footprint. 
PRELIMINARY SIZING OF THE SATELLITES 
The design of the satellite always starts with the 
conceptual and type of payload is used for the mission. 
Once the payload is known, one can go for the selection 
of the components of each sub-system based on the 
availability in the market. The selected component of 
each sub-system is shown in the form of the UML 
diagram. The Unified Modeling Language (UML) 
diagram is kind of a flow diagram, which represents the 
input and output of the system. The UML diagram of 
our selected components for each sub-system is shown 
in figure 3. 
From figure 3, we can see that the entire optimal 
component required for our satellites is represented by 
each sub-system box which will act as input to our 
INFRASAT satellite system. As the output, we will get 
different parameters like mass budget, power budget, 
point accuracy, optimal attitude requirement, etc., 
which 
were 
categorized 
each 
sub-system 
requirement. These mentioned parameters from the 
diagram are required while designing our whole set of a 
satellite. Each small satellite is equipped with a 
communication payload that uses X-band and VHF 
antenna, whereas the TT&C will use a high data-rate S-
band transmitter. The satellite requires a powerful set of 
batteries to operate along with an origami-designed 
solar panel with the implementation of GaN-FETs to 
improve the performance and efficiency of solar power 
conversion. The mass and cost budget estimations are 
the crucial part of the design which helps us to design 
each component by the method of compact engineering 
to the satellite body. The mass determination of each 
sub-system is done from the existing literature [16] and 
the cad design mass method. We had used both method 
and approximate mass budget were found based on the 
availability of the sub-system component in the market.  

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Sah et al 
[35th] Annual 
Small Satellite Conference 
Figure 3: UML diagram of InfraSat essential sub-systems component with essential parameters.
Table 2: InfraSat’s Mass and the Cost budget. 
Sub System 
Mass [Kg] 
(% of total) 
Cost Budget 
(Lakhs)            
(% of total) 
Structures 
10.55 (15.10%) 
53 (9.62%) 
ADCS 
3.21 (4.60%) 
78 (14.15%) 
Thermal 
2.92 (4.17%) 
20 (3.63%) 
Power 
16.57 (23.70%) 
95 (17.24%) 
Communication 
2.60 (3.71%) 
61 (11.07%) 
C &DH 
2.25 (3.22%) 
54 (9.8%) 
SAR Payload 
25.50 (36.48%) 
130 (23.60%) 
Propulsion 
5.50 (7.87%) 
20 (3.63%) 
Sub-total Integration 
0.8 (1.14%) 
10 (1.81%) 
Miscellaneous 
30 (5.44%) 
Total 
Target 
Margin 
69.90 (100%) 
70-72 kg 
0.10-2.1 kg 
551 Lakh (100%) 
The mass budget for our SAR payload satellites is 
shown in Table 2.  
The total estimated mass budget was 70-72 kg 
according to our calculation, but by cad design mass 
calculation, we got approximately 69.9 kg. The mass 
values include the contingencies. The payload sub-
system consists of a maximum mass of about 25.5 kg in 
the whole satellite system along with the power system 
which has a mass of about 16.57kg. And we will be 
adding a micro-propulsion system about of 5.5 kg 
weight for maneuvers purpose. 
The Cost of the SAR small satellite is determined by 
the Small Satellite Cost Model 2019 (SSCM19) 
procedure. The Cost of the satellite mostly depends 
upon the mass budget of the subsystem. SSCM19 
model estimates the costs of the satellite weighing less 
than 1000 kg by using Cost Estimating Relations 
(CERs) procedure which was derived from technical 
and actual cost parameters [17]. The cost budgets for 
our SAR payload small satellite are shown in Table 2. 
The cost budget values also include the contingencies. 
It can be seen that the total cost of each remote sensing 
satellite is about 551 Lakh INR which is approximate 
0.75M $. From, overall cost, the SAR payload and 
power sub-system costing a higher amount for the 
manufacture than other subsystems. We will be adding 
the micro-propulsion system for our satellite which will 
help us to execute different maneuvers and to de-orbit 
the satellite to the lower orbit after the end of life 
(EOL) of a satellite. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Sah et al 
[35th] Annual 
Small Satellite Conference 
Figure 4: UML diagram of InfraSat SAR payload essential parameters. 
The UML diagram of SAR payload considered 
parameters while designing is shown in figure 4. Based 
on our mission objective, the design for the SAR 
payload is considered. The SAR payload design 
depends upon all the subsystem requirements. The 
diagram represents the optimal parameters required by 
each subsystem and component while making operation 
SAR in the LEO space environment. It has shown 
structural, 
thermal, 
data 
handling, 
power 
parameters or aspect for our SAR payload. The arrow 
represents the flow characteristics required while 
making our SAR payload to the different subsystems of 
the satellite. This diagram has also shown the parameter 
like elevation dimension, size constraint check, and 
along-track 
calculation 
considered 
while 
designing the SAR mesh reflector antenna. The antenna 
becomes the most important component in the SAR 
payload which the main function is to receive and 
transmit data to the ground station installed in our 
footprint. 
The specification of our InfraSat payload is shown in 
Table 3. Our SAR payload consists of a mesh reflector 
antenna having an optical sensor with an x-band sensor 
having a frequency band of 200 MHz which will be 
operating on spotlight mode. The spotlight mode 
provides high-resolution images of our target footprint 
by using parabolic antennas, which can be rotated by 
mechanical means. Each satellite will be capable of 
taking multiple look images by using the spotlight 
mode with the minimum resolution of 1 meter per pixel 
and swath width of 10 km approx. The ground sample 
distance (GSD) for it is less than 0.5/2 m. The satellite 
will be taking multiple images from an orbit about of 3 
min to our footprint area. The taken images will be 
transmitted to the ground station by using the x-band 
frequency at the rate of 500 Mbps. Each satellite will be 
having a design life of 4 years. 
Table 3: Specification of InfraSat SAR payload. 
Item 
Specifications 
Sensor 
Optical  
Sensor frequency  
X-band 
Antenna type 
 Mesh reflector 
Observation Mode 
 Spotlight mode 
<0.5/2 m (multi from 600 km) 
Polarization 
Linear 
Resolution 
Swath 
10 km (spotlight mode) 
Data transmission 
X-band, 500Mbps, 10QAM 
Bandwidth 
200 MHz 
Imaging time per orbit 
 3 min 
Altitude  
600 km (Nominal) 
Design life 
4 years 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Sah et al 
[35th] Annual 
Small Satellite Conference 
COVERAGE QUALITY MEASUREMENT 
To calculate the satellite coverage towards India’s 
footprint, we just need to understand the different 
satellite coverage characteristics and its performance. 
The coverage characteristic consists of coverage quality 
or metrics as the preliminary requirement which will 
address the ground track across our area of interest 
footprint. The coverage metrics help us to investigate 
the regional or global coverage provided by one or 
more satellites by considering all the access times of the 
satellites.  
Figure 5: Block diagram for orbital design and 
coverage metrics calculation for India footprint. 
The schematic block diagram to find the coverage 
characteristics and parameters for our India location 
AOI is shown in figure 5. Once the constellation, 
orbital plane, and elements are designed, the satellites 
undergo the simulation phase. The simulation of the 
constellation was run for one day and the satellite 
access parametric dataset was generated for our given 
AOI. These datasets will help us to calculate the 
satellite coverage parameters. Before finding it, we 
need to generate the grid/mesh between the latitude and 
longitudinal direction of our AOI. The grid granularity 
of India’s location is discretized /meshed at 0.5° across 
the longitudinal and latitudinal direction. The coverage 
grid uses a set of points for the coverage sampling 
within our AOI. The schematic diagram of the 
discretized grid for the India location is shown in figure 
Figure 6: Coverage grid generation of India 
footprint with 0.5°discretization along lat-longs. 
Once the coverage grid is generated then the coverage 
characteristics are selected which helps us to formulate 
the coverage metric via the figure of the merits. Based 
on the access time from each satellite to each generated 
coverage grid point, the coverage iteratively computes 
the figure of merits satisfaction. 
The figure of the merits (FOM) consists of the 
following coverage quality metrics [18, 19]; 
Simple Coverage: It is defined as the coverage 
measured by the satellite at a point. 
Coverage Time: It is the time taken by 
satellites to cover the given target grid points 
in a given time. It can be measured in 
maximum, average, and total coverage time. 
It can be expressed as; 
          {     }                                     (3) 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Sah et al 
[35th] Annual 
Small Satellite Conference 
Where,         , 
represents the total, mean,  maximum, and 
single coverage time.  N and i represent the 
total number of the coverage duration in i-th 
time. If the maximum coverage time is larger, 
there will be enough time to capture an image 
for infrastructure monitoring. 
No. of Access:  It generally counts the 
coverage access by the set of satellites 
independently towards a point. 
Access Duration: It is the time interval taken 
by the satellites between the individual 
coverage accesses. 
Access Separation: It generally measures the 
coverage from the multiple satellites to a point 
within a defined time limit. 
No. of Gaps: It counts the gap number formed 
during the coverage to the points. 
Time Average Gap:  It is the average time 
taken by no. of the gaps formed during 
coverage of given grid points. 
Revisit time: It is the time interval at which the 
satellite continuously covers the same grid 
point. The revisit time is represented in 
maximum, minimum, and average format. But 
the average revisit time is mostly used for the 
analysis 
purpose 
important 
performance parameter in coverage metrics. It 
can be expressed as; 
Where,       represents the average revisit 
time duration of the satellite.  
Response time: It is the difference in the time 
at which coverage at a given grid point is 
obtained and coverage request is made. 
It is computed as  
Whereas,         represents the time average 
gap. 
Out of all the coverage metrics, the coverage time, 
revisit time, and response time are the major 
requirements for most of the infrastructure monitoring 
remote sensing satellites. These metrics help in 
determining the coverage characteristic performance of 
the constellation satellites. The satellite constellation 
can get the benefit of the higher coverage time and 
short revisit time to the given area of interest (AOI). 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
For our infrastructure monitoring, the coverage metrics 
are the most important aspect of our constellation 
design for SAR payload. Out of all the coverage 
metrics, the revisit time, response time, and percentage 
coverage are the most important metrics for our 
analysis. So, we had found these metrics based on our 
constellation design by considering the SAR payload. 
Figure 7: Graphical representation of revisit time 
(in min) across latitude (in degree). 
Figure 8: Graphical representation of revisit time 
(in min) across longitude (In degree). 
The schematic diagrams of revisit time along latitude 
and longitudinal location of India footprint are shown in 
Figures 7 and 8. From the graphs, we can see that the 
revisit time for our footprint by considering all the 
satellites operating in designed constellation ranges 
from 15- 35 minutes in any location of the India. The 
graphs also indicate the minimum, maximum and 
average values of the revisit time in the allocated 
footprint.  
The schematic diagram of the average revisit time 
contour for our India footprint can be shown in figure 9 
by using the data set of average revisit time values 
along with latitude and longitude of footprints.  The 
different color code represents average revisit time 
values of a particular location. And the boundary is 
encircled by a red color mark. This contour helps us to 
find the average time is required by satellites to reach 
again to the same point in an area of India. By knowing 
the average revisit time, we will be capable of finding 
when the satellite will be in our interested city and 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Sah et al 
[35th] Annual 
Small Satellite Conference 
places of India. So, the operation of the SAR payload in 
spotlight mode can be done and multiple look images 
can be taken for allocated infrastructure like building, 
oil pipes, canals, agriculture lands, roads, traffic 
monitoring, etc. These images obtained of allocated 
areas can be used for the monitoring and surveillance of 
that area. 
Figure 9:- Average revisit time contour 
representation across the footprint. 
Similarly, we had found the response time required for 
the smooth operation of the constellation of the satellite 
in the allocated footprint. The schematic diagrams of 
response time along the latitude and longitude location 
of India are shown in Figures 10 and 11. The response 
time was found in minimum, maximum, and average 
values in an allocated area of the footprint.  
Figure 10: Graphical representation of response 
time (in min) across latitude (in degree). 
Figure 11: Graphical representation of response 
time (in min) across Longitude (in degree). 
From both graphs, it can be seen that the response time 
value ranges from 25-120 min in any location of our 
footprint. 
Figure 12: Average response time contour 
representation across the footprint. 
The schematic diagram of the average response time 
contour for India’s footprint is shown in figure 12. 
From the figure, it can be seen that the different color 
codes can help us to find in which area, the response 
time required is more or less. These average values help 
to find at which time, we need to make the coverage 
request so the full coverage at the given grid location 
can be obtained. These metrics helps the payload sub-
system to get ready for its operation. 
The graphical representation of the coverage percentage 
along the simulation time is shown in figure 13. We can 
see that the coverage percentage is varying with respect 
to time and at a certain time; there is a gap which means 
we don’t have satellite access during that phase of time. 
But most of the time, the efficiency of the coverage is 
about a hundred percent.  
Figure 13: Graphical representation of % coverage 
across the simulation time (in UTCG). 
Overall, we can see that the revisit time, response time, 
and coverage efficiency in the coverage metrics play a 
primary role in the coverage performance of our 
satellites. These metrics help us to predict when the 
satellite will be coming to our interested footprint and 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Sah et al 
[35th] Annual 
Small Satellite Conference 
when we can have our payload operation during the 
mission. These parameters can act as guidelines for 
making our different subsystems in a highly accurate 
manner. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS 
A constellation of the small satellites for infrastructure 
monitoring has been designed by using the SAR as a 
payload. This constellation will be developed at LEO 
orbit which will cover an entire footprint of India 
location. The preliminary design of the satellite is done 
based on an available product in the market and on 
essential parameters required for our operation.  In this 
paper, we had presented our work in each section. The 
section of constellation design has represented the 
iterative design procedure of selection of our orbital 
parameters and orbital plane. And it was found that a 
total of 4 orbital planes were designed. Each orbital 
plane contains the 3 satellites and a total of 12 satellites 
will be operating. The orbital parameters are adjusted in 
a way that inclination of 36 degrees and RAAN varies 
from 70-130 degrees at a height of 600 km has been 
considered, which will be capable of making overall 
coverage of our India’s footprint.  
Whereas the preliminary sizing section has represented 
the distribution of the mass and cost budget of each 
sub-system of the small satellites and our SAR payload 
specification which is required to take multiple images 
while passing over India. Each InfraSat estimates a cost 
budget of about $ 0.75 M with an approximate of 70 kg 
mass budget. It will have a life span of 4 years and 
make continuous coverage across India. Each satellite is 
equipped with a sun sensor, GPS receiver, control 
moment gyros which will help to determine the satellite 
attitude and position accurately at minimum power 
requirement. The SAR payload will operate in the 
spotlight mode with a minimum resolution of one meter 
per pixel at a swath of 10km radius. The SAR data 
processing of the captured image are not presented in 
this paper. We have only shown the coverage metrics 
calculation and the results of the designed constellation. 
The coverage quality measurement section had 
described coverage metrics method and mathematical 
models involved in it along with the importance of the 
coverage performance. The coverage quality metrics 
were determined and essential metrics were calculated 
for the allocated footprint. Out of all the coverage 
metrics, the revisit time, response time, and coverage 
efficiency are the primary requirement to determine the 
coverage performance of the constellation. For our 
footprint, we found that the average revisits time for our 
constellation ranges from about 15- 35 min which is 
less than an hour. And the average response time for 
this iteratively designed constellation ranges about 25- 
120 min. Similarly, for the same constellation, we 
mostly got a hundred percent coverage efficiency most 
of the time. 
For future work, these preliminary datasets and 
calculations will be used for a more detailed design of 
our constellation satellite. Based on the market 
requirement, the potential investigation and up 
gradation in the SAR sub-system will be done with 
alternative 
observation 
mode 
consideration. 
Moreover, the operation of the SAR payload will cause 
high consumption of power; a market study will be 
done based on higher power availably with the least 
mass budget. Lastly, the other coverage metrics will be 
studied and analyzed for our designed constellation. 
References  
https://www.marketsandmarkets.com/Market-
Reports/small-satellite-market150947396.html. 
“Globalstar completes 48-satellite constellation,” 
Nov 1999. 
C. Williams, B. Doncaster, and J. Shulman, 
“Nano/microsatellite 
forecast, 
edition 
(2018),” Feb 2020. 
L. Bhavya, B. Elena, B. Jonathan, C. Benjamin, 
G. E.K, P. Alyssa, and B. Asha, “Global trends in 
small 
satellites.” 
https://www.ida.org//media/feature/publications/
g/gl/global-trends-insmall-satellites/p-8638.ashx, 
July 2017. 
R. Sandau, K. Brieß, and M. D’Errico, “Small 
satellites for global coverage: Potential and 
limits,” ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and 
Remote Sensing, vol. 65, no. 6, pp. 492 – 504, 
2010. ISPRS Centenary Celebration Issue. 
“Indian regional navigation satellite system 
(irnss).”https://www.isro.gov.in/irnss-
programme, June 2018. (Accessed on 2/14/2021). 
“Quasi-zenith satellite system (qzss) - cabinet 
office (japan).” https://qzss.go.jp/en/. (Accessed 
on 2/14/2021). 
D. Diekelman, “Design guidelines for post-2000 
constellations,” 
Mission 
Design 
Implementation of Satellite Constellations (J. C. 
van der Ha, ed.), (Dordrecht), pp. 11–21, 
Springer Netherlands, 1998. 
A. H. Ballard, “Rosette constellations of earth 
satellites,” IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and 
Electronic Systems, vol. AES-16, no. 5, pp. 656–
673, 1980. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Sah et al 
[35th] Annual 
Small Satellite Conference 
J. G. Walker, “Satellite Constellations,” Journal 
of the British Interplanetary Society, vol. 37, p. 
559, Dec. 1984. 
Rider, 
“Analytic 
design 
satellite 
constellations for zonal earth coverage using 
inclined 
circular 
orbits,” 
Journal 
Astronautical Sciences, 1986. 
J. E. Draim, “A common-period four-satellite 
continuous 
global 
coverage 
constellation,” 
Journal of Guidance,Control, and Dynamics, vol. 
10, no. 5, pp. 492– 499, 1987. 
J. R. Wertz, Mission geometry: orbit and 
constellation design and management: spacecraft 
orbit and attitude systems. 2001. 
https://www.agi.com/products/stk 
Vallado David A, “SGP4 Orbit Determination” 
AIAA-2008-6770, 2008. 
Aas. C., Zandbergen. B.T.C.,Gill, E.K.A., (2009) 
“SCALES: A System Level Tool for Conceptual 
Design of Nano- and Microsatellites”. In 7th IAA 
Symposium on Small Satellites for Earth 
Observation, Berlin, Germany. 
E. Mahr, A. Tu and A. Gupta, "Development of 
Small 
Satellite 
Cost 
Model 
2019 
(SSCM19)," 2020 IEEE Aerospace Conference, 
2020, 
1-12, 
doi: 
10.1109/AERO47225.2020.9172374. 
https://help.agi.com/stk/index.htm#training/Start
Coverage.htm 
Xu A., Feng X., Li Y., Li H., He D. (2019) 
Coverage of Hotspot Region with Small 
Satellite 
Constellation 
Design 
Optimization. In: Jia M., Guo Q., Meng W. 
(eds) Wireless and Satellite Systems. WiSATS 
2019. Lecture Notes of the Institute for 
Computer Sciences, Social Informatics and 
Telecommunications Engineering, vol 281. 
Springer,Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
030-19156-6_11 