Srivastava et al 
[35th] Annual 
Small Satellite Conference 
[SSC21-P2-11] 
Attitude and In-orbit Residual Magnetic Moment 
Estimation of Small Satellites Using only Magnetometer 
Raunak Srivastava, Roshan Sah, Kaushik Das 
TCS Research 
Bangalore, India; +918292346729 
srivastava.raunak@tcs.com 
ABSTRACT 
Attitude estimation or determination is a fundamental task for satellites to remain effectively operational. This task is 
furthermore complicated on small satellites by the limited space and computational power available on-board. This, 
coupled with a usually low budget, restricts small satellites from using high precision sensors for its especially 
important task of attitude estimation. On top of this, small satellites, on account of their size and weight, are 
comparatively more sensitive to environmental or orbital disturbances as compared to their larger counterparts. 
Magnetic disturbance forms the major contributor to orbital disturbances on small satellites in Lower Earth Orbits 
(LEO). This magnetic disturbance depends on the Residual Magnetic Moment (RMM) of the satellite itself, which for 
higher accuracy should be determined in real-time. This paper presents a method for in-orbit estimation of the satellite 
magnetic dipole using a Random Walk Model in order to circumnavigate the inaccuracy arising due to unknown 
orbital magnetic disturbances. It is also ensured that the dipole as well as attitude estimation of the satellite is done 
using only a magnetometer as the sensor. 
INRODUCTION 
Attitude estimation and determination is one of the most 
pivotal requirement of any satellite mission. Attitude, 
along with orbit determination determine the location of 
the satellite in space and its orientation in the orbit. 
However, attitude estimation of small satellites is 
complicated by their small size and small payload 
capacity. Small size brings in the additional constraint of 
limited computational resources, which are required to 
help determine the satellite’s attitude. As a result, many 
SmallSat users are constrained to use a single sensor for 
attitude estimation purposes. Magnetometers are one of 
the most basic and reliable sources of information for 
measuring the attitude of satellites. They are widely used 
today due to their low cost and high reliability [1].  
A lot of work has gone into estimation of satellite attitude 
through 
Kalman 
filter 
based 
methods 
using 
magnetometer and gyroscope as the sensors. Lefferts et 
al. [2] were one of the early researchers to estimate the 
satellite attitude using an Extended Kalman Filter (EKF). 
They examined several Kalman filter based schemes, 
which differed on the basis of their treatment of attitude 
error. Carletta et al. [3] proposed a method to estimate 
the attitude matrix through an unsymmetrical TRIAD 
algorithm using the measurements from a three-axis 
magnetometer. They arranged the complex matrix 
operations into a form of Faddeev algorithm that is then 
implemented on the FPGA core of the on-board 
computer. Habib [4] proposed an optimal fusion 
algorithm that optimally combines the output of different 
standard estimation algorithms. The computed output is 
stated to have a lower standard deviation than the 
previous algorithms. Jianqi et al. [5] proposed an 
Extended Kalman Filter (EKF) based orbit and attitude 
estimation algorithm using a magnetometer and a 
gyroscope. Filipski et al. [6] also used an EKF based on 
body-referenced representation of the state vector to 
estimate the satellite’s attitude using only the 
geomagnetic field data. The algorithm’s performance 
was evaluated through Monte Carlo simulations for a 
LEO nadir pointing satellite.  
There are numerous examples of actual deployments of 
magnetometer 
gyroscope 
based 
attitude 
determination systems on-board small satellites. Shou 
[7] described the development of an Attitude 
Determination and Control System (ADCS) for a 
microsatellite and verified its functioning using a 
Software in the Loop (SIL) method. The paper described 
the Kalman filter based ADCS functioning for three 
modes of the satellite- initialization mode, detumbling 
mode and mission mode. Similarly, Fritz et al. [8] 
described the ADCS design for the Cyclone Global 
Navigation Satellite System spacecraft. The detailed 
analysis 
comprised 
software 
hardware 
components of attitude estimation inline with the 
mission requirements was presented. A similar work by 
Lafontaine et al. [9] details the attitude determination 
system on-board European Space Agency’s Proba 
spacecraft.  

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Srivastava et al 
[35th] Annual 
Small Satellite Conference 
Although gyroscope as stated has been widely used on 
small satellites, it has its share of disadvantages. The 
gyro drift rate that leads to a fixed bias is a big problem 
for gyroscopes. It is also more prone to failures than a 
magnetometer and hence often requires a robust 
estimation technique. Adnane et al. [10] presented a 
Fault Tolerant Extended Kalman Filter (FTEKF) to 
improve the estimation reliability in the event of a sensor 
fault. A model of sensitivity factor was applied in the 
fault detection design of the filter to specifically detect 
gyroscopic failures. Soken et al. [11] also presented a 
modified EKF and Unscented Kalman Filter (UKF) as a 
robust estimation scheme against measurement faults. 
Zeng et al. [12] presented a Robust Adaptive Kalman 
filter using magnetometer and gyro measurements. A 
sequential scheme of orbit and attitude determination 
was proposed to reduce the impact of orbital errors on 
attitude estimation.  
Apart from the satellite constraints, Low Earth Orbits 
(LEO) also pose several demanding challenges in the 
form of environmental disturbances, causing disruptions 
in attitude estimation and control. The largest of such 
disturbances in lower earth orbits are the magnetic 
disturbances caused due to the earth’s magnetic field. 
This torque acts on the satellite due to its own Residual 
Magnetic Moment (RMM) or dipoles in the satellite 
body. It is important to consider this perturbation for 
accurate real-time estimation of the satellite attitude. 
Rawashdeh [13] developed a simulation tool named 
’Smart Nanosatellite Attitude Propagator (SNAP)’ to 
exhibit various environmental torques acting on a small 
satellite in the orbital environment. It was found that the 
magnetic disturbance on small satellites in low earth 
orbits is one order of magnitude higher than the 
remaining 
major 
disturbances 
(gravity 
gradient, 
atmospheric and solar).  
Soken et al. [14] estimated the satellite’s attitude, angular 
velocity and unknown constant components of external 
disturbance on a picosatellite using an Unscented 
Kalman Filter (UKF) by obtaining measurements from a 
magnetometer and a gyroscope. Gravity gradient torque, 
RMM, sun radiation pressure and aerodynamic drag 
were included in the unknown external disturbance. 
Ulrich et al. [15] presented Kalman based and nonlinear 
disturbance observer based techniques to estimate 
environmental perturbation torques acting on the 
satellite. The proposed estimation strategy was then 
applied to a gyroless Earth orbiting satellite mission of 
Proba-2. Soken et al. [16], [17] proposed a method for 
in-orbit estimation of time varying RMM of the satellite. 
They used a piecewise constant function to approximate 
the RMM and by using a simple approach, adapted the 
covariance matrix of Kalman filter to get better tracking 
accuracy in case of an unexpected abrupt change in the 
RMM without any adverse effect on the estimation 
accuracy.  
The motivation behind this work lies in the fact that 
magnetic disturbances should be modelled and 
considered as an external torque in order to increase the 
accuracy of attitude estimation. However, most of the 
current works consider everything under one common 
umbrella of white Gaussian process noise. As magnetic 
perturbation arising due to the satellite’s own RMM is 
paramount in LEO, modelling it should be a top priority. 
However, most of the research on this subject considers 
the satellite RMM to be a constant predetermined 
parameter and then models the magnetic disturbance. 
Accordingly, estimation algorithms either ignore the 
magnetic disturbance or consider it as a function of 
constant RMM. Since the RMM essentially changes 
slightly over time, it is better to estimate it in real-time 
instead of considering it as a constant or a piecewise 
constant parameter and then model the magnetic 
perturbation.  
The main contribution of this work is thus to model the 
satellite RMM using a Random Walk model instead of 
considering it as a constant or piecewise constant 
function. The magnetic disturbance due to this varying 
RMM is then modelled and taken as an external torque 
while solving for the system dynamics. This paper 
proposes a body referenced EKF to estimate the 
satellite’s RMM in real-time along with the satellite’s 
attitude and angular velocity. The integration of 
magnetic disturbance estimation with body referenced 
EKF can be understood from the below given flowchart 
in Fig. 1. 𝐵𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑠 represents the magnetic field measured 
by the magnetometer sensor while 𝐵𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑡ℎ represents the 
Earth’s reference magnetic field. 𝑚 represents the 
satellite RMM while 𝑞, 𝜔 represent its attitude and 
angular velocity respectively. We believe that this 
approach will result in a more accurate attitude 
estimation with real-time estimate of the external torque 
on the satellite, as is evident from the results.  
Figure 1: Flowchart 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Srivastava et al 
[35th] Annual 
Small Satellite Conference 
The organization of the paper is as follows. Section 
‘Satellite Model’ details the kinematic and dynamic 
model of satellite attitude in an orbit. Also, the magnetic 
disturbance arising due to satellite Residual Magnetic 
Moment is presented. Section ‘Attitude Estimation’ 
presents the EKF used for predicting satellite attitude and 
angular velocity from a magnetometer. The limitations 
of the EKF in its current form is presented and a body 
referenced EKF to solve the problem is shown. Section 
‘Residual Magnetic Moment Estimation’ presents the 
main contribution of this work. The problem of online 
RMM estimation is addressed and it is modelled as a 
random walk model. The resulting augmented EKF is 
presented for collective estimation of satellite attitude, 
angular velocity, and RMM. This results in an exact 
online measurement of non-stationary non-Gaussian 
magnetic disturbance. The simulation setup used for the 
study is explained in Section ‘Simulation Steup’ while 
the results are then shown in Section ‘Results’, followed 
by possible conclusions in Section ‘Conclusion’.  
SATELLITE MODEL 
The Orientation of a satellite in its orbit depends on its 
attitude and angular velocity. We represent the satellite 
attitude in terms of quaternions instead of roll, pitch, and 
yaw angles in order to avoid singularities. This section 
gives a brief description of the quaternion used to 
represent satellite attitude, the kinematic and dynamic 
expressions for satellite model and lastly, the model 
considered for representing the magnetic disturbance 
acting on the satellite due to its own residual magnetic 
moment. 
Quaternion Representation of Attitude 
In the present study, the attitude is represented by the 
quaternion defined as 
𝑞̅ = [ 𝑞⃗
] = [
Where  
𝑞⃗=  𝑛̂ sin(𝜃
𝑞4 = cos(𝜃
 𝑛̂ represents the axis of rotation while 𝜃 represents the 
angle of rotation around the mentioned axis. Since the 
degrees of freedom remain 3, an additional constraint 
needs to be imposed on the quaternion to maintain the 
same. Accordingly,  
𝑞̅𝑇 𝑞̅ = 1 
With the quaternions in place, the attitude rotation matrix 
in terms of quaternions can be writeen as  
𝐴(𝑞) = (|𝑞4|2 −|𝑞⃗|2)𝐼3 + 2 𝑞⃗𝑇𝑞⃗−2𝑞4[𝑞⃗]                (1) 
Where 
[𝑞⃗] = [
Satellite Equations of Motion 
Satellite attitude is represented by it’s orientation with 
respect to the orbital frame. The rate of change of 
satellite attitude defines the angular velocity vector 𝜔⃗⃗ 
and can be expressed as a quaternion product 
𝑑𝑡 𝑞̅(𝑡) =
2 𝜔̅ ⨂𝑞̅(𝑡) =
2 [𝜔̅] 𝑞̅(𝑡)                             (2) 
Where  
𝜔̅ = [𝜔⃗⃗
[𝜔̅] = [
where  𝑞̅ is the satellite attitude quaternion while 𝜔⃗⃗ is the 
satellite body angular velocity with respect to the orbital 
frame. 
Satellite attitude dynamics can be obtained from the 
Euler’s law expressed in the body frame as  
𝜔̇ = 𝐽−1(𝜏−𝜔×𝐽𝜔)                                                    (3) 
Where  
𝜔× = [
𝜏 is the net applied moment about the satellite centre of 
mass in the body frame, 𝐽 is the inertia matrix about the 
mass centre and 𝜔 is the body angular velocity with 
respect to inertial frame. Angular velocity of satellite 
relative to inertial frame can be expressed in the body 
frame as 
𝑏= 𝜔𝑖𝑜
𝑏+ 𝜔𝑜𝑏
𝑏= 𝑅𝑜
𝑏𝜔𝑖𝑜
𝑜+ 𝜔𝑜𝑏

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Srivastava et al 
[35th] Annual 
Small Satellite Conference 
Where 𝜔𝑖𝑏
𝑏 is the satellite angular rate vector in the 
inertial frame while 𝜔𝑜𝑏
𝑏 is the satellite angular rate 
vector in the orbital frame.  𝑅𝑜
𝑏 represents the rotation 
matrix from the orbital frame to the body frame and is 
obtained in terms of quaternion  𝑞̅. 𝜔𝑖𝑜
𝑏 is the orbital 
velocity in the inertial frame which remains constant in 
case of a circular orbit. It can be expressed as 
𝑜= [
−√𝐺𝑀
Magnetic Disturbance 
Residual magnetic dipoles exist in the satellite structure 
as well as in the on board electronic equipment. Just like 
a magnetic dipole experiences a magnetic moment that 
seeks to align the dipole with the magnetic field lines, a 
magnetic moment also acts on the satellite due to its own 
residual magnetic dipole in the presence of Earth’s 
magnetic field. This is the reason that this magnetic 
moment in the form of disturbance is strongest near the 
Earth’s surface due to relatively strong magnetic field. 
Although passive control techniques make use of 
magnetic moment acting due to the Earth’s magnetic 
field, it is essential that the exact nature and magnitude 
of such moments be known from before so that it no 
longer remains an unknown disturbance. This moment or 
torque acting on the satellite can be modelled as 
𝑀𝑚= 𝑚× 𝐵𝐸𝑎𝑟𝑡ℎ                                                        (4) 
where, 𝑚 is the Residual Magnetic dipole of the satellite 
and 𝑀𝑚 is the torque acting on the satellite due to this 
dipole. Most of the previous works on satellite attitude 
estimation have either ignored the effect of this magnetic 
disturbance or have considered the satellite RMM to be 
constant while computing this magnetic disturbance. 
This leads to unrealistic computation of the magnetic 
disturbance, which is detrimental to accurate real-time 
estimation of the satellite attitude. 
The current section gave an overview of the 
preliminaries required in order to estimate the satellite 
attitude in orbit and in order to solve the dynamic 
equations. With the basics ready, the next section details 
the EKF that is used for attitude estimation using a 
magnetometer as the sole sensor. 
ATTITUDE ESTIMATION 
This section presents the Extended Kalman Filter used 
for attitude and angular velocity estimation using a 
magnetometer. Initially an EKF based on standard state 
equations is presented which is later modified to cater to 
the problems arising due to an extra state in the EKF. The 
modified body referenced EKF is also explained. 
State Equation 
The satellite state can be considered to be composed of 
the attitude quaternion  𝑞̅ and the angular velocity 𝜔. 
𝑥(𝑡) = [𝑞̅
𝜔]                                                                   (5) 
where, the attitude quaternion and angular velocity rates 
are given by Eq. 2 and 5 respectively. The nonlinear 
system requires an EKF for state estimation and 
considers a white Gaussian noise 𝑤(𝑡) as the process 
noise. This noise takes care of the imperfections in the 
dynamic modelling and acts as a substitute for any 
unknown disturbance which is Gaussian in nature. 
𝑑𝑡𝑥(𝑡) = 𝑓(𝑥(𝑡), 𝑡) + 𝑤(𝑡) 
Such that  
𝐸(𝑤(𝑡)) = 0 
𝐸[𝑤(𝑡)𝑤𝑇(𝑡)] = 𝑄(𝑡) 
where 𝑄(𝑡) is the process noise covariance. The jacobian 
for state propagation using the above mentioned states 
can be expressed as 
𝜙(𝑡) = 𝛿𝑓
𝛿𝑥 |_𝑥= 𝑥̂ 
Where  
𝜙(𝑡) = [
2  Ω(𝜔)
2 Ξ(𝑞̅̂)
03×4
𝐽−1((𝐽𝜔)× −𝜔×𝐽)
Ξ(𝑞̅̂) = [
However, it happens that the covariance matrix for the 
above mentioned seven dimensional state vector is 
singular. This follows from the standard quaternion 
norm of 
𝑞̅𝑇 𝑞̅ = 1 
Thus, the covariance matrix can develop a zero or even 
a negative eigen value. One way to avoid such a situation 
is to use a state vector of a lower dimension. It is for this 
purpose that a body referenced EKF is used for the 
purpose of satellite attitude estimation. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Srivastava et al 
[35th] Annual 
Small Satellite Conference 
Body Referenced EKF 
Body referenced representation offers an alternative 
representation to the state vector and covariance matrix 
representation. 
quaternion 
error 
this 
representation is expressed not as the arithmetic 
difference between the actual and estimated quaternion, 
but as the small rotation required in the estimated 
quaternion to be equivalent to the true quaternion. Since 
this rotation is very small, the quaternions’s fourth scalar 
component (𝑞4) is almost equal to unity. As a result, all 
the attitude information is available through the vector 
component (𝑞⃗) of the quaternion. Thus, the seven-
dimensional state vector reduces to six dimensional 
incremental representation of states in the form of state 
error. The error quaternion and error angular velocity is 
thus defined as 
𝛿𝑞= 𝑞̅ ⊗𝑞̅̂−1                                                              (6) 
Δ𝜔= 𝜔−𝜔̂                                                                (7) 
The six dimensional state vector thus becomes 
𝑥̃(𝑡) = [𝛿𝑞
⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗
And the corresponding state perturbation for the body 
referenced representation is 
Δ𝑥̃ = [𝛿𝑞
where the first three terms refer to the vector component 
of the error quaternion whereas the last three terms refer 
to the angular velocity of the body in the inertial frame, 
expressed in the body frame. The error rate for 
quaternion can be expressed as 
𝛿 𝑞̇ = −𝜔×𝛿𝑞+
2 Δ𝜔                                                  (8) 
Similarly, the error rate for angular velocity can be 
derived by differentiating Eq. 5 and ignoring higher 
order terms upon taking Taylor expansion. The error rate 
thus becomes 
Δ 𝜔̇ = 𝐽−1[(𝐽𝜔)× −𝜔×𝐽]Δ𝜔                                       (9) 
With these error rates as the state vector, the EKF takes 
the following form 
Δ 𝑥̃̇ = 𝜙 Δ 𝑥̃ + 𝑤 
where 𝜙 is the state transition matrix while 𝑤 is a white 
Gaussian noise. The state transition matrix has the 
following form 
𝜙(𝑡) = [−𝜔×
2 I3
𝐽−1((𝐽𝜔)× −𝜔×𝐽)
Available Measurement 
As stated before, the only sensor used for this study is a 
magnetometer. The measurement equation of a 
magnetometer can be given as  
𝐵𝑏= 𝐴(𝑞)𝐵𝑜= 𝑣 
where 𝐵𝑏 represents the magnetic field at the body centre 
of mass in the body frame while 𝐵𝑜 represents the 
magnetic field at the body centre of mass in the orbital 
frame. While 𝐵𝑜 is calculated from the standard 
International Geomagnetic Refernce Model (IGRF), 𝐵𝑏 
is the actual magnetometer reading installed on the 
satellite body. 𝑣 represents a white Gaussian noise 
inherent in the sensor. The rotation matrix from orbital 
to body frame can be computed from the satellite attitude 
quaternion as mentioned in Eq. 1. 
The magnetic field measured by the magnetometer in the 
body frame (𝐵𝑏) is compared with the estimate of 
magnetic field obtained through the rotation of standard 
magnetic field from orbital frame to the body frame 
(𝐴(𝑞)𝐵𝑜). The difference, also called as innovation helps 
in the correction step of EKF to get the updated error 
rates of quaternion and angular velocity. 
Δ𝐵= 𝐵𝑏−𝐵̂𝑏 
For a small angle rotation, the attitude rotation matrix 
from Eq. 1 can be approximated as 
𝐴(𝑞) = (|𝑞4|2 −|𝑞⃗|2)𝐼3 + 2 𝑞⃗𝑇𝑞⃗−2𝑞4[𝑞⃗] 
𝐴(𝛿𝑞) ≈𝐼3 −2𝛿𝑞× 
Thus, the innovation term can be written as 
Δ𝐵= 𝐵𝑏−𝐵̂𝑏 
       = 𝐴(𝑞)𝐵𝑜+ 𝑣−𝐵̂𝑏 
       = 𝐴(𝛿𝑞)𝐴(𝑞)𝐵𝑜+ 𝑣−𝐴(𝑞)𝐵𝑜 
       = (𝐼3 −2𝛿𝑞×)𝐴(𝑞)𝐵𝑜+ 𝑣  
       = 2(𝐴(𝑞)𝐵𝑜)×𝛿𝑞+ 𝑣 
Thus, the measurement matrix becomes 
𝐶= [2(𝐴(𝑞)𝐵𝑜)×    03]                                              (10) 
Thus, with the help of a single magnetometer as a sensor, 
it is possible to estimate the satellite attitude and angular 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Srivastava et al 
[35th] Annual 
Small Satellite Conference 
velocity. However, as stated in the introduction, the 
mentioned EKF does not consider any perturbation or 
environmental disturbance of any kind. The next section 
details the method adopted to reduce the effect of 
magnetic disturbances by model the RMM using a 
Random Walk Model. Its integration into the body 
referenced EKF is also presented in the next section.    
RESIDUAL 
MAGNETIC 
MOMENT 
(RMM) 
ESTIMATION 
The biggest environmental disturbance on small 
satellites in Low earth orbits is due to the magnetic effect 
of the Earth. One of the prime reasons for this 
disturbance is the residual magnetic dipole of the satellite 
itself. However, this magnetic disturbance was 
erroneously considered a white Gaussian noise in the 
previously mentioned EKF. 
This section seeks to model the magnetic torque acting 
on the satellite due to it’s own RMM and then include it 
as an external torque while computing the satellite 
dynamics instead of considering it as a white Gaussian 
disturbance. However, it is essential to estimate the 
RMM of satellite in real time for modelling the magnetic 
disturbance as a known torque whose influence can then 
be easily circumvented. A Random Walk Model is used 
for the same purpose. 
Random Walk Model 
While propagating the states of an EKF, if the 
disturbance in the model is not stationary and Gaussian, 
it should be estimated and considered as an external 
disturbance while propagating the EKF. For this 
purpose, the unknown disturbance is augmented along 
with the remaining states and estimated. Accordingly, if 
the state equation is initially the standard equation 
𝑋(𝑘+ 1) = 𝐹(𝑋(𝑘), 𝑈(𝑘)) + 𝐷(𝑘) 
where 𝑋(𝑘) is the state vector, 𝑈(𝑘) the input vector and 
𝐷(𝑘) is the stationary white Gaussian noise considered 
in the modelling process. In this case, the disturbance is 
unknown but its nature is assumed to be Gaussian. An 
EKF on such a propagation model does not give the 
desired results in case of non-Gaussian noise such as the 
magnetic perturbation given in Eq. 4. In such cases, the 
disturbance can be estimated along with the remaining 
states as shown below 
[𝑋(𝑘+ 1)
𝐷(𝑘+ 1)] = [𝐹(𝑋(𝑘), 𝑈(𝑘), 𝐷(𝑘))
𝐷(𝑘+ 1)
] + [0
𝐼] 𝑤𝑑(𝑘) (11) 
The disturbance is modelled as a random walk model 
wherein the differential change in the disturbance is 
equal to the white Gaussian noise only. In such an 
implementation, the Gaussian noise is added only to the 
disturbance state instead of all the states as done 
previously. The disturbance in the remaining original 
state vector is now a function of the augmented state 
only. 
RMM estimation using EKF 
As stated above, magnetic disturbance should not be 
ignored and included as a white gaussan noise while 
propagating the satellite attitude and angular velocity 
error rates. Also, because the RMM of the satellite keeps 
changing over the period of orbit, it is better to estimate 
the RMM In real time than consider it as a constant for 
the entire duration. Once the RMM is estimated, the 
magnetic disturbance which is a function of RMM can 
be directly included as an external torque in the 
dynamics update of the satellite as in Eq. 5. Thus, the 
error in RMM is augmented in the state vector as  
Δ 𝑥̃ = [
]                                                                (12) 
However, with the addition of error in RMM, the 
propagation model of the EKF changes. External torque 
in the form of Eq. 4 is now included in the dynamics 
propagation as shown in Eq. 3. Also, the white Gaussian 
noise is now only added in the disturbance state RMM 
instead of addition to all the remaining states. The new 
state transition looks like 
Δ𝑥̃̇ = 𝜙 Δ𝑥̃ + [
where 𝑤 is a white Gaussian noise. The modified 
differential equations for quaternion error rates and 
angular velocity error rates can be expressed as 
𝛿𝑞̇ = −𝜔×𝛿𝑞+
2Δ𝜔                                                 (13) 
Δ 𝜔̇ = 𝐽−1[Δ𝑚× 𝐵] + 𝐽−1[(𝐽𝜔)× −𝜔×𝐽]Δ𝜔           (14) 
RandomWalk model is applied to the satellite RMM in 
order to propagate it. However, the states of body 
referenced EKF are the differential change in the states 
and not the states themselves as shown in Eq. 12. Thus, 
the RMM and its differential (error in RMM) can be 
propagated as 
𝑚̇ = 𝜂 
Δ𝑚̇ = 0 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Srivastava et al 
[35th] Annual 
Small Satellite Conference 
With all the three set of states (error in quaternion, error 
in angular velocity and error in RMM) in place, the new 
state transition matrix can be expressed as 
𝜙(𝑡) = [
2 𝐼3
𝐽−1((𝐽𝜔)× −𝜔×𝐽)
−𝐽−1𝐵×
Since there is no new measurement added, the only 
change in measurement matrix is to accommodate the 
augmented state. Thus, the modified measurement 
matrix becomes 
𝐶= [2(𝐴(𝑞)𝐵𝑜)×    03    03]                                      (15) 
SIMULATION SETUP 
Figure 2 describes the coordinate frames in use for the 
current simulation. The inertial frame is the Earth 
centered Inertial (ECI) frame with its origin at the earth’s 
centre. The orbital frame is the North-East-Down (NED) 
frame at the satellite centre of mass. The satellite’s body 
frame is such that the 𝑧 axis points towards the centre of 
Earth while 𝑥 axis points in the direction of it’s velocity 
vector. 𝑦-axis completes the right-handed triad of the 
coordinate system. The satellite used for the current 
study is the M-SAT whose properties were used to 
generate the results. M-SAT has a dimension of 50𝑐𝑚×
50𝑐𝑚× 60𝑐𝑚 and is hexagonal in shape. It has a mass 
of around 50𝑘𝑔. M-SAT orbits in a LEO orbit at an 
altitude of around 400𝑘𝑚 from the Earth’s surface with 
an orbit inclination of 40𝑜. 
For the purpose of attitude and in-orbit RMM estimation 
of the satellite, the satellite was simulated in the 
simulator STK in order to get its orbital positions and 
latitude, longitude, altitude details over a time period of 
30𝑚𝑖𝑛. The latitude, longitude details give us the 
pinpoint location of the satellite in the ECI frame, which 
helps us get the Earth’s magnetic field at that position 
according to the IGRF-12 model. This serves as the 
reference magnetic field which is used in the correction 
step of the EKF later on. 
Figure 2: Coordinate Frames 
RESULTS 
This section puts forward the results obtained from the 
proposed 
method 
estimation. 
Firstly, 
quaternion and angular velocity estimates are shown 
when the RMM is considered fixed. A constant pre-
determined value of RMM is taken and the external 
magnetic disturbance is considered. Thereafter, RMM is 
estimated in real time by propagating it using a 
RandomWalk model and the improvement in estimation 
results shown. The improved results depict the efficacy 
of RMM estimation using the proposed methodology. 
Without real-time RMM estimation 
Figure 3 and Fig. 4 show the attitude quaternion and 
angular velocity estimates of the satellite as obtained 
from the EKF. The simulation is run while considering 
the magnetic disturbance but with constant pre-
determined value of the Residual magnetic moment of 
the satellite. The continuous lines depict the estimates 
while the dashed line depicts the actual ground truth 
unknown to the estimator. It can be seen that although 
the estimates try to follow the actual data, there are quite 
a few mismatches at various points in time. Moreover, 
the estimates have a lot of chattering due to the magnetic 
disturbance. We seek to rectify these shortcomings by 
attitude and angular velocity estimation while estimating 
the RMM also in real time. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Srivastava et al 
[35th] Annual 
Small Satellite Conference 
Figure 3: Quaternion estimates with constant 
Figure 4: Angular velocity estimates with constant 
With real-time RMM estimation 
This subsection presents the results of the method 
proposed in the current work. The EKF is augmented 
with the RMM components which are in turn propagated 
by a Random Walk model. The resulting estimates are 
shown.  
Figure 5 shows the estimates of the four quaternions 
obtained from the EKF while considering the external 
magnetic disturbance. The continuous line shows the 
EKF estimate while the dashed line shows the actual 
modelled data which serves as the ground truth unknown 
to the estimator. It can be seen that the RMM augmented 
estimator is efficiently able to estimate the attitude 
quaternion despite the presence of magnetic disturbance. 
The first three quaternions represent the vector part of 
the attitude while the fourth quaternion represents the 
scalar part. 
Figure 5: Quaternion estimates 
Figure 6 shows the angular velocity estimates obtained 
from the EKF estimator. This velocity is in the body 
frame with respect to the inertial ECI frame. It can again 
be seen that the estimator is able to estimate the actual 
values of the angular velocities correctly. The continuous 
line shows the estimates while the dashed line shows the 
actual ground truth values of the angular velocity 
components unknown to the estimator. Initial chattering 
in the estimates is perhaps due to the large initial co-
variance taken for the state estimates. 
Figure 6: Angular velocity estimates 
An important contribution of the current work is shown 
in the Fig. 7, which shows the satellite’s residual 
magnetic moment estimates. Initial value of this RMM 
is shown as dashed lines which is usually considered as 
constant in most state of the art estimators. However, the 
current work uses a Random Walk model to propagate 
this RMM and hence model the external magnetic 
disturbance instead of considering it as a white Gaussian 
noise. The continuous line in Fig. 7 shows the estimate 
of RMM components obtained from the estimator. It can 
be seen that they tend to vary from the initial value of 
RMM and do not match exactly with the initial values. 
Thus, it is better to use real-time estimate of the time-
varying RMM values instead of constant, pre-calibrated 
value of the same parameter. Reasonable estimates of the 
quaternion and angular velocities in Fig. 5 and Fig. 6 are 
testimonies to the accuracy and importance of this 
estimation. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Srivastava et al 
[35th] Annual 
Small Satellite Conference 
Figure 7: RMM estimates 
Figure 8 shows the innovation components of the 
estimator. 
dashed 
line 
shows 
actual 
measurements which is of the order of 10−5 while the 
continuous line shows the innovation terms along the 
three component axes. The innovation is of the order of 
10−6. This further solidifies the fact that the EKF 
estimator is correctly able to estimate the satellite 
attitude and in-orbit RMM in the presence of magnetic 
disturbance. 
Figure 8: Innovation 
CONCLUSION 
This paper proposed a method to estimate the residual 
magnetic moment of the satellite in-orbit with the 
objective of accurately modelling the magnetic 
disturbance acting on the satellite. For the purpose of 
satellite attitude estimation, state of the art methods 
consider the RMM to be a constant precalibrated value 
while the RMM value tends to change during flight due 
to variations in the electric flow in the on board 
equipment. Because this variation is not very large and 
is completely random, it cannot be modelled in any way. 
This paper thus uses a Random Walk model to model the 
RMM and then uses the updated RMM value to 
accurately model the magnetic disturbance acting on the 
satellite in real-time. 
The results of this exercise have been put forward. 
Accurate estimation of the satellite attitude and angular 
velocity show that the proposed method of in-orbit 
estimation of satellite RMM works well. The estimates 
of quaternion and angular velocity are much more 
accurate and smooth when the RMM is estimated real 
time as opposed to when it is considered as a constant. 
The estimate of RMM as shown above proves that the 
RMM indeed varies in flight, and it is hence more 
appropriate to estimate the RMM and therefore magnetic 
disturbance in flight for high accuracy of the satellite 
attitude estimation. Moreover, the entire estimation only 
uses a magnetometer as the sensor. Hence this is highly 
useful for small satellites which have limited space and 
computational power and hence support lesser sensors 
and actuators. 
References  
J. Cote and J. de Lafontaine, “Magnetic-only orbit 
and attitude estimation using the square-root 
unscented kalman filter: application to the proba-
2 spacecraft,” in AIAA Guidance, Navigation and 
Control Conference and Exhibit, p. 6293, 2008.  
E. Leffens, F. L. Markley, and M. D. Shuster, 
“Kalman 
filtering 
spacecraft 
attitude 
estimation,” Journal of Guidance, Control, and 
Dynamics, vol. 5, no. 5, pp. 417–429, 1982. 
S. Carletta, P. Teofilatto, and M. S. Farissi, “A 
magnetometer-only 
attitude 
determination 
strategy for small satellites: Design of the 
algorithm and hardware in-the-loop testing,” 
Aerospace, vol. 7, no. 1, p. 3, 2020. 
T. M. A. Habib, “A new optimal fusion algorithm 
spacecraft 
attitude 
determination 
estimation algorithms,” The Egyptian Journal of 
Remote Sensing and Space Science, vol. 21, no. 3, 
pp. 305–309, 2018. 
W. Jianqi, C. Xibin, and S. Zhaowei, “Attitude and 
orbit determination for small satellite using 
magnetometer 
measurement,” 
Aircraft 
Engineering and Aerospace Technology, 2003. 
M. Filipski and R. Varatharajoo, “Evaluation of a 
spacecraft attitude and rate estimation algorithm,” 
Aircraft Engineering and Aerospace Technology, 
2010. 
Shou, 
“Micro-satellite 
attitude 
determination and control subsystem design and 
implementation: Software-in-the-loop approach,” 
in 2014 International Symposium on Computer, 
Consumer and Control, pp. 1283–1286, IEEE, 
2014. 
M. Fritz, J. Shoer, L. Singh, T. Henderson, J. 
McGee, R. Rose, and C. Ruf, “Attitude 
determination and control system design for the 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Srivastava et al 
[35th] Annual 
Small Satellite Conference 
cygnss microsatellite,” in 2015 IEEE Aerospace 
Conference, pp. 1–12, IEEE, 2015. 
J. De Lafontaine, J. Buijs, P. Vuilleumier, P. Van 
den Braembussche, and K. Mellab, “Development 
of the proba attitude control and navigation 
software,” in Spacecraft Guidance, Navigation 
and Control Systems,  vol. 425, p. 427, 2000. 
A. Adnane, H. Jiang, M. A. S. Mohammed, A. 
Bellar, and Z. A. Foitih, “Reliable kalman filtering 
for satellite attitude estimation under gyroscope 
partial failure,” in 2018 2nd IEEE Advanced 
Information 
Management, 
Communicates, 
Electronic and Automation Control Conference 
(IMCEC), pp. 449–454, IEEE, 2018. 
H. E. Soken, C. Hajiyev, and S.-i. Sakai, “Robust 
kalman filtering for small satellite attitude 
estimation in the presence of measurement faults,” 
European Journal of Control, vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 
64–72, 2014. 
Z. Zeng, S. Zhang, Y. Xing, and X. Cao, “Robust 
adaptive filter for small satellite attitude 
estimation based on magnetometer and gyro,” in 
Abstract and Applied Analysis, vol. 2014, 
Hindawi, 2014. 
S. A. Rawashdeh, “Attitude analysis of small 
satellites 
using 
model-based 
simulation,” 
International Journal of Aerospace Engineering, 
vol. 2019, 2019. 
H. E. S¨oken and C. Hajiyev, “Estimation of 
picosatellite attitude dynamics and external 
torques via unscented kalman filter,” Journal of 
Aerospace Technology and Management, vol. 6, 
no. 2, pp. 149–157, 2014. 
S. Ulrich, J. Cˆot´e, and J. de Lafontaine, “In-flight 
attitude perturbation estimation for earth-orbiting 
spacecraft,” The Journal of the Astronautical 
Sciences, vol. 57, no. 3, pp. 633–665, 2009. 
H. E. Soken, S.-i. Sakai, and R. Wisniewski, “In-
orbit estimation of time-varying residual magnetic 
moment,” IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and 
Electronic Systems, vol. 50, no. 4, pp. 3126–3136, 
2014. 
H. E. Soken and S.-i. Sakai, “In-orbit estimation 
of time-varying residual magnetic moment for 
small satellite applications,” in AIAA Guidance, 
Navigation, and Control (GNC) Conference, p. 
4650, 2013.  