A Graph-Based Customizable Handover
Framework for LEO Satellite Networks
Mohamed Hozayen, Tasneem Darwish, Gunes Karabulut Kurt¶, Halim Yanikomeroglu
Department of Systems and Computer Engineering, Carleton University, Otawa, ON, Canada
¶Poly-Grames Research Center, Department of Electrical Engineering, Polytechnique Montr´eal, Montr´eal, QC, Canada
Emails: {mohamedhozayen, tasneemdarwish, guneskurt, halim}@sce.carleton.ca
Abstract—Future satellite networks are expected to have
thousands of low Earth orbit (LEO) satellites orbiting Earth
at very high speeds. User equipment (UE) communicating
directly
with
satellites
will
experience
frequent
handovers. Managing the handover process is complicated
due to the high frequency of handovers and the availability
of multiple LEO satellites as handover targets. In addition,
as the status of the communication link between a UE and
an LEO satellite varies in accordance with the visibility
period of the satellite, initiating handovers at the right time
will signiﬁcantly aﬀect the quality of service (QoS) of the
communication provided. To address this problem, this work
proposes a graph-based customizable handover framework
that considers both the handover timing and target while
selecting
handover
sequence
that
maintains
QoS.
time-based graph is designed where the vertices represent
the satellites’ instances over a certain period of time and
the edges’ weights are the customizable handover criteria
(i.e., data rate and delay in this work). Te appropriate
sequence and timing of handovers that fulﬁll the required
QoS are obtained by ﬁnding the shortest path in the graph.
Discussion and simulations, which were conducted on the
Starlink Phase I constellation, show the low complexity
and performance advantages of the proposed handover
framework.
Index Terms—Mobility management, handover timing, LEO,
satellite networks, 6G non-terrestrial networks, VHetNets,
user preference customization.
I. Introduction
In future integrated vertical heterogeneous networks
(VHetNets) [1], low Earth orbit (LEO) satellites will play a
signiﬁcant role in providing global communication and Inter-
net services. Many commercial companies, including SpaceX
and Amazon are launching LEO satellite constellations to
provide global connectivity [2]. Due to the low altitude of
LEO satellites (500 km - 1,500 km), their propagation delays
are lower than geostationary (GEO) satellites [3]. More-
over, their low altitude reduces the amount of transmission
power required and diminishes signaling atenuation, both
of which are necessary to enable direct communication with
user equipment (UE). Unfortunately, the deployment of LEO
satellites has some disadvantages. Due to their high speeds,
UE will need to handover its connection from one satellite
to another every 5–10 minutes. In the near future, satellite
mega-constellations will be able to provide communication
services anywhere and anytime. However, the availability
of several satellites over a certain geographic area makes
handover decisions (i.e., choosing the handover timing and
target satellite) a more complicated process. In addition,
multiple applications with diﬀerent quality of service (QoS)
requirements will use satellite networks. Tus, to satisfy
the needs of diﬀerent applications, a customizable handover
timing and target calculation is required.
Some work has already been done to tackle handover
issues for LEO satellite networks. In [4], the authors devel-
oped a hard handover scheme and a hybrid channel adaptive
handover scheme by considering satellite signal strength
relative to the elevation angle. Te work in [5] proposed a
guaranteed handover procedure in non-geostationary satel-
lite constellations requiring mutual visibility based on various
criteria, including visible time, satellite capacity, elevation
angle, and a combination of the same. Te authors in [6]
proposed a handover protocol based on a sofware-deﬁned
satellite network architecture, where the performance was
evaluated on the basis of latency, throughput, and quality
of experience for users. Te work in [3] presented a graph-
based framework to support handover decision strategies in
LEO satellite networks on the basis of service time, elevation
angle, and number of free channels. In [7], the authors
proposed a multi-layer handover management framework,
which introduced several handover procedures where the
performance was evaluated on the basis of dropping proba-
bility and throughput.
Although several studies have been done on LEO satellite
handover decisions, to the best of our knowledge, the joint
consideration of satellite handover timing and targeting in
planning the UE handover sequence has not yet been stud-
ied. In this work, we investigate the optimal sequence for
handover timing and targeting that would fulﬁll user QoS
requirements while considering parameters that would aﬀect
the handovers.
In so doing, we present a graph-based customizable han-
dover planning framework for LEO satellite networks. To do
this, we formulate the problem as a time-based graph by
representing a satellite as a series of instances that reﬂect
its position and link status over time. Satellite instances are
represented as graph nodes, and each edge has a weighted
sum value calculated using a customized set of handover pa-
arXiv:2211.07872v1  [cs.NI]  15 Nov 2022

--- PAGE BREAK ---

rameters (i.e., data rate and delay in this work). Te favorable
sequence of handover timing and targets is determined by
ﬁnding the shortest path in the graph. Te framework is
customizable, modular, ﬂexible, and thus forward compatible
with future integrated VHetNets. As the framework predicts
future handover timing and targets, it will also be able to
support sof handovers (connect before disconnect) leading
to lower packet loss.
II. Graph-Based Customizable Handover Planning
Framework for LEO Satellite Communication
Networks
A. Network Model
QEFC
Fig. 1. A quasi earth-ﬁxed cell served by multiple satellites.
In this work, we consider the scenario of a group of
LEO satellites serving a quasi earth-ﬁxed cell (QEFC) on
Earth. Tis was proposed by 3GPP in Release 17 as a po-
tential solution for non-geostationary satellite orbit (NGSO)
mobility management [8]. As shown in Fig. 1, when satel-
lite s1 approaches the minimum elevation angle, users in
the QEFC need to perform a handover to satellite s2 to
maintain their current connections. In future LEO satellite
mega-constellations, a single QEFC can be served by several
satellites, which will create multiple targeted satellite options
in the handover process. Due to satellite movement and the
satellite’s signal blocking in some areas (e.g., urban areas with
high buildings), the quality of satellite to UE communica-
tion links varies in accordance with the satellite’s visibility
period. In addition, users or applications with diﬀerent QoS
requirements may necessitate customized handover decision-
making. Tus, joint consideration of the handover timing and
target (i.e., next satellite) is necessary to make optimized han-
dover decisions. Fig. 2 shows diﬀerent instances of satellites
s1, s2, s3, and s4 over a time duration, T, divided into several
short, equally sized time durations t1, t2, ..., ti. Te optimal
time for the handover from satellite s1 to any of the target
satellites (s2, s3, or s4) is aﬀected by several criteria (e.g.,
satellites positions, link quality, required QoS), which are
variable through time. Terefore, in the proposed framework
we represent every satellite as several satellite instances to
reﬂect changes in satellite communication status over time.
Accordingly, the satellite instance s2−2 represents satellite s2
at time duration t2. Since future satellite networks will have
thousands of LEO satellites, the coverage periods of multiple
satellites will be overlapping. We assume user positions and
LEO satellite information are readily obtainable, e.g., by using
the GPS-based approach as in [9] and the simpliﬁed general
perturbations (SGP4) model as in [10].
s2-1
s2-2
s2-3
s1-6
s1-7
s1-8
s1-9
Time 
s3-4
s3-5
s3-6
s3-7
s4-2
s4-3
s4-4
s4-5
Duration
Fig. 2. LEO satellite positions at diﬀerent time instances.
B. Graph-Based Problem Formulation for Handover Timing and
Target
Let us suppose that for a given user in a QEFC, to maintain
a connection with certain QoS requirements, a sequence of
handovers is required among satellites for a time duration,
T. As shown in Fig. 2, we split T into n equal sized time
durations, ti, i.e., Pn
i=1 ti = T and ti = (µi ± λ), where
µi is the mean value of ti and λ is the relaxation period.
Te satellites covering a certain QEFC during T are mapped
to an instance at every ti creating several instances of each
satellite (e.g., s2−1, s2−2, s2−3). Te satellite instances form
a set S = {s1−1, s1−2, ..., s1−n, s2−1, ..., sk−n}, where k is
the total number of satellites, n is the total number of time
instances, n×k is the total number of satellite instances, and
each element sj−i ∈S has a corresponding start and end
periods, i.e., µi −λ and µi + λ, respectively. By considering
satellite instances as graph nodes and the handover decision-
making criteria as directed weighted edges, the sequence of
handover timings and targets for period T is determined by
ﬁnding the highest ranking path in the directed weighted
graph.
Fig. 3 shows the directed weighted time-based graph of
the LEO satellites corresponding to Fig. 2. In the directed
graph, the straight edges represent the transition between
diﬀerent instances of the same satellite (no handover is
performed), whereas diagonal edges represent handovers
between instances of two diﬀerent satellites with an overlap-
ping coverage period. Each directed edge weight in the graph
is calculated as a weighted summation of pre-deﬁned utility
functions, which collectively form the handover decision-
making criteria. Te weighted summation model (WSM) is
one of the multi-criteria decision making (MCDM) methods.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Equation (1) formulates the directed edge weight calculation,
in general, as
W sj−i =
wm U sj−i
where W sj−i is the edge weight directed to the satellite
instance sj−i, U sj−i
is a utility function representing a
handover criterion corresponding to satellite sj at time ti,
wm is a weighting factor of utility function U sj−i
, and M is
the total number of considered utility functions in the han-
dover decision-making, where PM
m=0 wm = 1. Te handover
framework can be customized to the requirements of each
user by changing the weighting factors to give preference
to certain utility functions and/or by using diﬀerent utility
functions (e.g., data rate, delay, and jiter). It should be noted
that since the model is a linear combination of diﬀerent utility
functions, each utility function shall be normalized before
calculating edge weights. Tis ensures that the model does
not overlook a certain utility function over others due to its
nature of high values. Nonetheless, the selection of which
normalization technique to use is not the focus of this work.
For example, delay is measured in milliseconds in satellite
networks, whereas data rate is measured in megabits per
seconds. Te preference for a certain utility function is given
by the weight wm.
In this work, the data rate and delay are the criteria
considered in the handover decision-making process. Tus,
the generic equation (1) can be speciﬁed as follows:
W sj−i = wd U sj−i
+ wr U sj−i
Te favorable sequence of handovers in the graph is deter-
mined using the Dijkstra’s Algorithm to ﬁnd the shortest path
between two selected nodes, where the shortest path is the
path with the lowest summation of weight edges. Terefore,
lower delays are preferred, and therefore,
U sj−i
where
PD is the normalized propagation delay. However,
higher data rate values are preferred, and therefore,
U sj−i
= 1 −ˆR,
where ˆR is the normalized data rate.
C. Customized Handover Sequence Selection Process
Te graph-based customizable handover framework selects
handover timings and sequence of targeted satellites for the
next time duration T. Te selection process is detailed as
follows:
1) Select QEFC’s and UE’s location.
2) Identify UE’s QoS preferences and utility functions.
3) Select preferred T and λ.
4) Obtain LEO satellite information accordingly.
5) Choose appropriate channel model.
6) Build UE’s customized database table.
S1, t1
S1, t2
S1, t3
S2, t3
S3, t4
S4, t4
S2, t2
S4, t3
S4, t2
S1, t4
Fig. 3. Te directed weighted handover graph corresponding to Fig. 2.
a) Row indexes are satellite numbers.
b) Columns are time instances.
c) Each cell represents a satellite instance of set S
that matches its corresponding column and row
index.
d) Cells contain the calculated weighted sum of util-
ity functions of the same satellite instance.
7) Build a time-based graph as in Fig. 3.
a) Te directed edge to a satellite instance is its own
cell value.
b) Add a virtual beginning node directed to the ﬁrst
instance of all satellites, i.e., sj−1.
c) Add a virtual end node for the last instance of all
satellites, i.e, sj−n, directs to.
8) Solve the graph from the virtual beginning node to the
virtual end node using Dijkstra’s Algorithm.
Te solution is a sequence of nodes in the form of sj−i,
where j is the satellite number and i is the handover timing
indication where ti=(µi ± λ). While λ, the relaxation period,
provides some ﬂexibility as to the exact time in which the
handover can take place, in this paper the handover timing
is taken at (µi + λ).
D. Channel Model
Te channel model expression mainly consists of path loss,
Rician small-scale fading, and atmospheric fading [11]. Te
atmospheric fading, A(d), is given by
A(d) = 10
10h ,
where χ is the atenuation through the clouds and rain in
dB/km, d is the propagation distance between satellites and
the UE, calculated by
h2 + (x −ox)2 + (y −oy)2,
where (ox, oy) is the position right below the satellite. Te
channel model expression is

--- PAGE BREAK ---

G = ( clight
4πdfc
)2 A(d) ϕ,
where ϕ is the Rician small-scale fading. clight and fc are
the speed of light and the carrier frequency, respectively. Te
received power is given by
Prx = Ptx Gtx G Grx,
where Ptx is the transmit power, Gtx and Grx represent the
antenna gains of the transmiter and receiver, respectively.
Te user data rate is given by the Shannon capacity theorem
R = B log(1 + Prx
where B is the channel bandwidth, and PN is the noise
power. Propagation delay is given by
PD =
clight
(10)
III. Framework Evaluation
A. Complexity Analysis
Te highest ranking path in the constructed time-based
graph is determined using the Dijkstra’s Algorithm by ﬁnd-
ing the shortest path between two nodes. Te Dijkstra’s
Algorithm has a complexity of O(E + V log V ) when a
Fibonacci heap is used, where E is the number of edges
and V is the number of nodes, or, in the context of this
framework, the total number of satellite instances [12]. Let
n = E + V , therefore, O(n) < O(E + V log V ) < O(n2).
As T is split into smaller equally sized time durations,
ti, λ →0, then V, E →∞, and thus, the complexity of
the handover graph approaches inﬁnity while the handover
solution approaches optimality:
λ→0[H(S, T, λ), O(E + V log V )] = [v∗, ∞].
(11)
Fig. 4 shows the complexity analysis of ﬁnding the shortest
path in the handover graph for diﬀerent λ values at T = 30
minutes. In a worst case scenario, for a given QEFC, all 1,584
satellites of Starlink Phase I constellation would be used, but
in reality far fewer satellites would be expected to ﬂy over
a QEFC during a 30-minutes period. To bring things into
prospective, 1.8×109 operations are executed in half a second
on a personal user device with a CPU frequency of 3.6 GHz,
given that one operation consumes one CPU cycle.
B. Simulation Parameters
Te graph-based handover framework is simulated within
a Starlink Phase I constellation environment generated by the
well-known satellite constellation simulator STK version 12.1
[13]. Te constellation consists of 1,584 satellites within 22
orbits (72 satellites per orbit) with an altitude of 550 km [2].
Te location of interest selected as the QEFC is Otawa with
one UE under evaluation. Te downlink carrier frequency is
in the Ku band at 11.9 GHz, the bandwidth block for the UE
 (seconds)
Complexity (# of operations)
Complexity vs  (T=30 minutes)
Fig. 4. Te complexity of ﬁnding the shortest path in the handover graph
using all 1,584 satellites of Starlink Phase I Constellation using diﬀerent λ
values.
is 10 MHz, the noise power spectral density is -173 dBm/Hz,
the satellite transmit power is 10 dB, the Rician small-scale
fading is 20 dB, the atmospheric fading’s atenuation is 0.05
db/km. Te utility functions of data rate and delay have the
same preference, thus, the weights in equation (2) are both
set to 0.5.
Te graph-based handover framework is compared against
a well-known legacy algorithm for satellite handover han-
dovers. Tis algorithm is based on a threshold strategy of
the satellite’s elevation angle from the UE. In this simulation,
the threshold angle is 10 degrees. When the satellite elevation
angle reaches 10 degrees, the handover process is triggered.
C. Results and Discussion
In this simulation, data rate and delay are the handover
criteria used to customize the handover sequence to the UE.
Our graph-based method (GM) and the threshold method
(TH) are compared in terms of the resulted UE’s data rate. For
both methods, the UE starts the connection with the same
satellite.
In Fig. 5, following the customized handover sequence
selection process of the GM, the total time duration, T, is 30
minutes, which is split into six equally sized time durations,
ti. Each time duration is 300 seconds, where λ = 150 seconds,
ti = (µ ± 150). During T, the TH results in three handovers
while the GM results in ﬁve handovers at which a handover
takes place once every ﬁve minutes or every 2λ. In fact, the
GM’s number of handovers is dependent on λ; smaller λ
values result in suggesting more handovers and vice-versa,
as shown in Figs. 6 and 7. Although the number of handover
suggestions might increase using the GM, with beter timing
and selection of handovers, sof handovers can be achieved.
Tis is diﬀerent from the TH method, where the handovers
will mostly be hard handovers.
Regarding the performance comparison, by visual inspec-
tion, the GM data rate is constrained at a higher range of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Time (min)
Data rate (Mbps)
ti =
= 300 sec 
GM: 5 handovers
TH: 3 handovers
Fig. 5. Te UE’s data rate over 30 minutes using the threshold method (TH)
and the graph method (GM) with λ = 150 seconds (2.5 minutes).
Time (min)
Data rate (Mbps)
ti =
= 240 sec 
GM: 6 handovers
TH: 3 handovers
Fig. 6. Te UE’s data rate over 30 minutes using the threshold method (TH)
and the graph method (GM) with λ = 120 seconds (2 minutes).
Time (min)
Data rate (Mbps)
ti =
= 360 sec 
GM: 4 handovers
TH: 3 handovers
Fig. 7. Te UE’s data rate over 30 minutes using the threshold method (TH)
and the graph method (GM) with λ = 180 seconds (3 minutes).
Mbps than the TH, as shown in Figs. 5, 6, and 7. In addition,
it is obvious that GM prevents the sharp drops in data rate
peaks, which clearly shows that GM has the advantage of
maintaining QoS. In particular, the performance of GM in Fig.
5, where GM results in ﬁve handovers at which a handover
takes place once every ﬁve minutes, is perfectly reasonable
and much beter than in normal terrestrial cellular networks
with moving user terminals. Furthermore, a comprehensive
statistical comparison is required to quantify the signiﬁ-
cance of the framework over TH (the legacy algorithm). Te
cumulative distribution function (CDF) is used to compare
the TH and the GM with diﬀerent λ values. Fig. 8 shows
the data rate behavior of both methods at diﬀerent CDF
percentages. For example, at 20% CDF, the TH has 20% of
its data rate performance under 15.7 Mbps, which is similar
to the GM with λ = 300 seconds (GM-10), GM-6 is under
19.3 Mbps, GM-5 is under 20.1 Mbps, and GM-4 is under 21.2
Mbps. Terefore, as λ decreases in the GM, the performance
improves while the cost to pay is the number of handovers.
A direction for future research would be to analyze the trade
oﬀon selecting the appropriate λ value considering sof
handover and other optimization techniques.
Data rate (Mbps)
CDF (%)
Data Rate CDF
GM ti=1 min
GM ti=2 min
GM ti=3 min
GM ti=4 min
GM ti=5 min
GM ti=6 min
GM ti=7 min
GM ti=8 min
GM ti=9 min
GM ti=10 min
= 10o
Fig. 8. Te UE’s data rate cumulative distribution function of the threshold
method (TH) and the graph method (GM) with various λ values (λ = ti/2).
IV. Conclusions
Tis paper proposed a graph-based customizable handover
planning framework for LEO satellite networks. As dis-
cussed, the framework uses the idea of a time-based graph
where the satellites instances are represented by vertices
and the edge weights are obtained through the customizable
handover criteria. Te results and accompanying discussion
demonstrated shows the eﬀectiveness of the novel handover
framework, which is also low in complexity, modular, ﬂexible,
and expected to be forward compatible.
V. Acknowledgment
Tis work has been supported by the National Research
Council Canada’s (NRC) High Troughput Secure Networks
program (CSTIP Grant #CH-HTSN-625) within the Optical
Satellite Communications Consortium Canada (OSC) frame-
work. Te authors would like to thank Dr. Aizaz Chaudhry

--- PAGE BREAK ---

for providing the simulation data of Starlink Phase I constel-
lation.
References
[1] M. Alzenad and H. Yanikomeroglu, “Coverage and Rate Analysis for
Vertical Heterogeneous Networks (VHetNets),” IEEE Transactions on
Wireless Communications, vol. 18, no. 12, pp. 5643–5657, 2019.
[2] SpaceX
update,
Nov.
2018,
“SpaceX
Non-Geostationary
Satellite
System,
Atachment
Technical
Information
Supplement
Schedule
[Online].
Available:
htps://fcc.report/
IBFS/SAT-MOD-20181108-00083/1569860, Accessed: October 08, 2022.
[3] Z. Wu, F. Jin, J. Luo, Y. Fu, J. Shan, and G. Hu, “A Graph-Based Satellite
Handover Framework for LEO Satellite Communication Networks,”
IEEE Communications Leters, vol. 20, no. 8, pp. 1547–1550, 2016.
[4] M. Gkizeli, R. Tafazolli, and B. Evans, “Modeling Handover in Mobile
Satellite Diversity Based Systems,” in 54th Vehicular Technology Con-
ference., vol. 1, 2001, pp. 131–135.
[5] P. Boedhihartono and G. Maral, “Evaluation of the Guaranteed Han-
dover Algorithm in Satellite Constellations Requiring Mutual Visibil-
ity,” International Journal of Satellite Communications and Networking,
vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 163–182, 2003.
[6] B. Yang, Y. Wu, X. Chu, and G. Song, “Seamless Handover in Sofware-
Deﬁned Satellite Networking,” IEEE Communications Leters, vol. 20,
no. 9, pp. 1768–1771, 2016.
[7] Y. Li, W. Zhou, and S. Zhou, “Forecast Based Handover in an Extensible
Multi-Layer LEO Mobile Satellite System,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp.
42 768–42 783, 2020.
[8] 3GPP,
“Study
Architecture
Aspects
Using
Satellite
Access
5G,”
Generation
Partnership
Project
(3GPP),
Technical
Speciﬁcation
(TS)
23.737,
March
2021,
version
17.2.0.
[Online].
Available:
htps://portal.3gpp.org/desktopmodules/
Speciﬁcations/SpeciﬁcationDetails.aspx?speciﬁcationId=3485
[9] I. Ali, N. Al-Dhahir, and J. E. Hershey, “Predicting the Visibility of
LEO Satellites,” IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems,
vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 1183–1190, 1999.
[10] D. A. Vallado, P. Crawford, R. Hujsak, and T. S. Kelso, “Revisiting
Spacetrack Report #3,” in AIAA/AAS Astrodyn Specialist Conference,
2006, pp. 1–88.
[11] A. Ibrahim and A. S. Alfa, “Using Lagrangian Relaxation for Radio
Resource Allocation in High Altitude Platforms,” IEEE Transactions on
Wireless Communications, vol. 14, no. 10, pp. 5823–5835, 2015.
[12] M. L. Fredman and R. E. Tarjan, “Fibonacci Heaps and Teir Uses
in Improved Network Optimization Algorithms,” Journal of the ACM,
vol. 34, no. 3, p. 596–615, 1987.
[13] AGI, “Systems Tool Kit (STK),” [Online]. Available: htps://www.agi.
com/products/stk, Accessed: October 08, 2022.