SpaceMeta: Global-Scale Massive Multi-User
Virtual Interaction over LEO Satellite Constellations
Jiahe Huang, Yifei Zhu
UM-SJTU Joint Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center(CMIC), Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Email: sevenkishuang@sjtu.edu.cn, yifei.zhu@sjtu.edu.cn
Abstract—Low latency and high synchronization among users
are critical for emerging multi-user virtual interaction applica-
tions. However, the existing ground-based cloud solutions are
naturally limited by the complex ground topology and fiber
speeds, making it difficult to pace with the requirement of
multi-user virtual interaction. The growth of low earth orbit
(LEO) satellite constellations becomes a promising alternative
to ground solutions. To fully exploit the potential of the LEO
satellite, in this paper, we study the satellite server selection
problem for global-scale multi-user interaction applications over
LEO constellations. We propose an effective server selection
framework, called SpaceMeta, that jointly selects the ingress
satellite servers and relay servers on the communication path to
minimize latency and latency discrepancy among users. Extensive
experiments using real-world Starlink topology demonstrate that
SpaceMeta reduces the latency by 6.72% and the interquartile
range (IQR) of user latency by 39.50% compared with state-of-
the-art methods.
Index Terms—multi-user virtual interaction, LEO satellite
constellation, server selection
I. INTRODUCTION
recent
years,
multi-user
virtual
interaction
finds
widespread applications in online games and social networking
applications, where users constantly interact with thousands of
other users via virtual avatars, video streaming, and audio.
For example, platforms like Facebook Spaces and VRChat
enable users to connect with friends, explore virtual envi-
ronments, and partake in diverse activities using personalized
avatars. It is reported that the 24-hour average player number
on Steam-based VRChat already surpassed 20,000 in June
2023 [17]. In general, over 15.49 million consumer VR
headsets are sold in 2022 [18].
The increasing popularity of multi-user virtual interaction
demands a seamless user experience for a massive number of
users. To provide an immersive experience to these users, low
latency, high synchronization among users, as well as high
scalability of the system are crucial. Low latency is critical to
enabling real-time interactions; High synchronization ensures
consistent and coordinated events, actions, and feedback for all
users. Accommodating as many users as possible improves the
social value of the applications and consequently the quality
of experience for every user within the system for the better
interaction feature.
This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of
China (62302292) and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central
Universities. Corresponding author: Yifei Zhu
Current architectures of multi-user interaction applications
predominantly rely on ground cloud servers. However, in
such an architecture, terrestrial communications tend to travel
through optical fibers, which are approximately 30% slower
than the speed of light. This essentially limits the data trans-
mission speed of cloud-based interactions. Additionally, the
complex topography of the Earth’s surface, such as across
oceans, often leads to longer transmission paths, further in-
creasing latency.
With the advancement of space techniques and the maturity
of low-cost communication satellites, LEO satellites emerge as
a promising solution to support global-scale communication.
LEO satellites offer enhanced communication capabilities,
allowing information to travel through space close to the
speed of light, with fewer spatial constraints. Thousands of
LEO satellites further form a satellite network, also known
as constellations, where satellites work together to provide
extensive coverage. As of May 2023, Starlink comprises over
4000 LEO satellites of different phases and groups.
These satellites are further connected by inter-satellite links
(ISLs). ISLs establish direct connections between satellites,
eliminating the need for ground-based infrastructure and re-
ducing reliance on traditional terrestrial communication net-
works. By leveraging ISLs, satellite constellations like Starlink
achieve faster and more efficient data transfer, bolster network
resilience, and enhance global coverage. This revolutionizes
satellite communications and unlocks new possibilities for
global connectivity. With a substantial number of satellites in
orbit and wide coverage, LEO satellites can serve as servers
and control units in multi-user virtual interaction architectures.
The LEO mega-constellation holds significant promise in
meeting this need.
However, moving multi-user virtual interaction applica-
tions from the ground to space poses significant challenges.
Firstly, the rapid movement of satellites introduces a dynamic
topology, requiring adaptive strategies to maintain a stable
connection. The continuous access and departure of users
during the session add another layer of complexity. Second, the
ingress satellite server and the communication path between
communication pairs have to be carefully selected so that the
latency can be minimized and the synchronization among all
pairs can be maximized.
In this paper, we study the satellite server selection prob-
lem for global-scale multi-user interaction over LEO satellite
arXiv:2402.09720v1  [cs.MM]  15 Feb 2024

--- PAGE BREAK ---

constellations. We first present an architecture that utilizes
satellites as relay servers. We then propose SpaceMeta that
intelligently selects ingress server and relay servers jointly
minimize the latency and the latency discrepancy among users
in a virtual interaction session. Extensive experiments on real-
world application scales demonstrate the efficiency of our
approach.
In summary, our contributions are:
• We present the first work to examine the possibility of
supporting global-scale multi-user virtual interaction over
the emerging LEO satellite constellations.
• We formulate the satellite server selection problem as a
latency and synchronization minimization problem.
• We propose an effective greedy solution to identify the
first hop ingress server in the LEO constellations as well
as the transmission path between users.
• Extensive experiments on the scale of the Starlink con-
stellation demonstrate that our approach can reduce la-
tency by up to 40.67% and interquartile range of latency
by up to 80.28% when compared with the state-of-the-art
solutions.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II
presents the related work. Section III introduces the system
model of SpaceMeta and formulates the problem. Section IV
showcases the relay selection and flow generation algorithms
involved. Section V includes the test results of our approach,
which are also compared with other existing methods. Finally,
Section VI concludes the work.
II. RELATED WORK
A. Satellite Networks and Applications
LEO satellites offer a promising network establishment
approach to manage the growing number of edge devices and
offer global communication coverage. In [2], StarPerf employs
AGI STK [19] to simulate motion trajectories of Starlink
(Phase 1) satellites and assess inter-satellite connectivity based
on distance. In [1], a cloud-satellite combined architecture,
incorporating both LEO satellites and ground base stations
as potential servers, is proposed to reduce average attendee
latency. UAVs (unmanned aerial vehicles) can also act as
links between satellites and ground stations. Researchers in
[5] explore UAVs as relay servers, efficiently gathering and
transmitting IoT (Internet of Things) data from numerous IoT
devices to LEO satellites. In hybrid satellite-terrestrial modes,
Ma et al. in [6] investigate reliability issues in long-distance
relaying transmissions, considering end-to-end latency and
outage performance with geometrical probability theory.
In addition to latency, numerous studies have also explored
additional indicators such as bandwidth, power, and through-
put in data transmission. For power allocation in relay satellites
to maximize total data rate, Wang et al. in [7] utilize virtual-
ization, the difference of convex (DC) programming, and an
iterative algorithm to achieve optimal solutions. Addressing
limited spectrum resources and the demands of numerous
users, researchers in [8] establish cooperative transmission
of non-orthogonal multiple access-assisted integrated satellite-
terrestrial networks with multiple terrestrial relays and con-
sider a partial relay selection scheme.
Furthermore, researchers in [9] tackle the conflict between
latency and throughput in relay selection, formulating antenna
scheduling as a stochastic non-convex fractional programming
and transforming it into a solvable weight-matching problem
through mathematical methods.
B. Multi-user interactive systems
Numerous studies focus on low-latency multi-media sys-
tems, addressing architecture, coding, and transport protocols.
For instance, researchers in [10] introduce a novel approach
that utilizes application flow destinations to calculate service
delay. They implement forwarding, caching, and innovative
coding services, reducing packet recovery costs by combining
packets from multiple application streams and strategically
sending a limited number of coded packets via more ex-
pensive cloud paths. In the same vein, Salsify in [4] opti-
mizes compressed frame length and transmission time based
on network capacity estimation, enabling real-time Internet
video to promptly respond to network changes, prevent packet
drops, and avoid queuing delays. Moreover, VIA in [3] is an
architecture that utilizes selected ground station-based relays
to construct a managed overlay network, effectively reducing
latency in Internet telephony. Notably, the three systems dis-
cussed are all cloud-based only.
Multi-user virtual interaction is an extensively researched
domain. Chen et al. in [15] present fundamental metaverse
concepts, including computing, logical, physical, and protocol
architectures. The study emphasizes the significance of edge
computing and edge server placement in optimizing resource
utilization and access delay. Meanwhile, researchers in [12]
address issues such as limited user vision in the metaverse by
implementing a server partitioning system based on regions,
enhancing the object discovery service, and ensuring mini-
mum throughput for communicating objects. For a broader
perspective, Solipsis in [16] tackles the world-scale Metaverse
using a Raynet-based decentralized architecture protocol, con-
sidering geometric distributions in the real world. Moreover,
researchers in [14] optimize communication and computing in
the digital twins-enabled metaverse, utilizing edge servers to
reduce latency and enhance stability. Additionally, SLAMCast
in [13] is an innovative MC-based transmission protocol,
which effectively lowers bandwidth requirements in multi-user
VR scenes, and achieves a stable client-server system with the
aid of a novel thread-leveled GPU hash set.
In multi-user and multi-party interactive live streaming,
ensuring synchronization among all attendees holds significant
importance. RobinHood in [11] addresses this concern by
concentrating on reducing tail latency in CDN-based video
streaming systems. The work proposes a novel approach
involving the dynamic reallocation of cache resources, effec-
tively repurposing existing caches to mitigate the impact of
backend latency variability, resulting in low tail latency.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

LEO Constellation
Users
Regions
Servers
Flow
Fig. 1: System overview.
III. SYSTEM MODEL AND PROBLEM FORMULATION
A. System Overview
Figure 1 depicts the overall architecture of the multi-user in-
teraction application supported by the LEO constellation. The
architecture is divided into two primary segments: the space
segment and the ground segment. In the space segment, LEO
mega-constellations like Starlink are utilized, establishing
inter-satellite links (ISLs), and the satellites serve as servers,
including ingress servers and others. On the other hand, the
ground segment encompasses all users, classified into different
regions based on population distribution, with each region
assigned a specific ingress server. The two segments are
interconnected through user-to-satellite links (USLs), and the
flow between users is governed by algorithms detailed in IV.
B. Connection Model
Denote S as the set of all satellites. The multi-user virtual
interaction consists of various sessions, denoted as E. Within
a specific session e, we use Ue to represent the set of all users.
The system comprises two types of links: inter-satellite links
(ISLs), represented as ISL(m, n), where m, n ∈S, and user-
satellite links (USLs), denoted as USL(m, n), where m ∈
U, n ∈S.
The movement of LEO satellites at high speeds impacts
the link between two satellites due to their visibility. To
address this, we introduce a binary visibility variable denoted
as V is(m, n), where V is(m, n) = V is(n, m) = 1 if and only
if node m and n are visible to each other. Typically, visibility is
directly related to the distance and is achievable only between
adjacent satellites. For USLs, a link is established only when
the satellite is visible to the ground node. Additionally, each
satellite can accommodate up to λ transmission units to build
ISLs due to the limited number of antennas.
In our system, we assume that the upstream and downstream
share the same bandwidth capacity for each link. The corre-
sponding ingress relay server receives the upstream flow from
a user u and subsequently sends the total of flows from other
attendees back to u as the downstream flow. We represent
the bandwidth capacity of the link (m, n) as Cap(m, n).
Furthermore, we denote Bup
and Bdown
as the upstream and
downstream bandwidth requirements of user u.
C. User-perceived Communication Latency Model
Denote xmn as a binary variable. xmn = 1 if and only if
both node m and node n are selected as relays, establishing a
link for data transmission between the two nodes. Also, denote
as a binary variable. ymn
= 1 if and only if data is
transmitted from user i to user j through the link (m, n).
We make the assumption that the latency from node m to
node n, represented as Lmn, is equal in the opposite direction
as well. Thus, for session e at slot t, the latency from user u
to its ingress relay Re,u
is: Σm,n∈S∪UeLmn·xmn·ymn
u,Re,u
. The
end-to-end latency between two users i and j can be expressed
as the sum of the latencies from the two users to their
corresponding relays and between the relays, which can be
written as: Σm,n∈S∪UeLmn·xmn·(ymn
i,Re,i
t +ymn
Re,j
,j+ymn
Re,i
,Re,j
t ).
Denote P e as the number of users in session e. Considering
the end-to-end latency between every two users, the average
one-way latency for each session is calculated as:
tave =
i,j∈Ue
Σm,n∈{S∪Ue}Lmn · xmn · (ymn
i,Re,i
+ ymn
Re,j
,j + ymn
Re,i
,Re,j
 P e
where Re,i
t , Re,j
are the corresponding ingress servers of users
i, j.
D. Problem Formulation
The goal is to obtain a balance between synchronization and
average latency should be reached with a weight parameter α:
(tave + α
|tave −ti|)
s.t.
xmn ≤λ, ∀m ∈S
ij , ynm
≤xmn ≤V is(m, n), ∀m, n, i, j ∈{S ∪Ue}
u,Re
u,Re
γ = u
γ = Re
otherwise
t ,u −
t ,u =
γ = Re
γ = u
otherwise
u,Re
(Bup
u · ymn
u,Re
t + Bdown
· ymn
t ,u) ≤Cap(m, n)
Constraint Eq. 3 demonstrates that the number of ISLs for
each satellite must be less than the number of transmission
units. Constraint Eq. 4 indicates that a link can be established
only if the nodes are visible to each other, and data can be
transmitted through this link only if it is activated. Constraints

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Eq. 5, 6 show that only one upstream flow and one downstream
flow could exist between user u and the control unit Re
t, where
w, v, γ ∈{S ∪Ue}, Re
t ∈S, u ∈Ue. Constraint Eq. 7
guarantees that each link could satisfy its bandwidth capacity.
IV. ALGORITHM DESIGN
A. Algorithm Overview
The key idea involves time division into dynamic slots
and managing the selection of ingress servers along with
data transmission paths between them. During runtime, the
virtual interaction session follows these steps: First, the system
employs the ingress relay selection algorithm (Algorithm 1) to
determine the appropriate ingress server from the available
satellites. Next, the selected ingress servers receive virtual
interaction requests from users within their respective regions.
Subsequently, the ingress servers transmit data to each other,
utilizing the flow allocation algorithm (Algorithm 2) to choose
optimal paths between them and allocate the flow.
B. Ingress Relay Selection Algorithm
Algorithm 1 outlines the ingress relay selection algorithm
in detail. For each session e at time t, the ingress relay set
is denoted as Re
t. At every time slot, the visibility and the
graph G is updated. All satellites and users are represented as
nodes in G, and an edge exists between two nodes if and only
if they are visible to each other. The users are then divided
into different regions using the Region_Divider function,
ensuring that each region contains at most Nmax users and the
distance between any two users is at most dmax. Each region
re corresponds to a specific ingress relay Re,re
at time t.
To identify the ideal ingress relay for each region, the
algorithm selects k potential relays using the Top_k function,
filtering k nodes among satellites that are closest to the
center of all users’ locations in that region. Subsequently,
the algorithm chooses the best potential ingress server for the
current slot based on its low latency synchronization ability.
The parameter L(cu, Ue,re) represents the weighted sum of
average latency and variance for session e in the region re
according to Eq. 2.
In cases where the distance between two ideal ingress relay
servers of the same region exceeds the threshold ∆, or when a
new attendee joins the session, a handover process is triggered.
The Flow(u, Re,re
) function updates the flow situation in
the graph, including variables like ymn
u,Re,re
. Additionally, the
allocate function determines the best path between the
user and the relay server, which will be further discussed in
Algorithm 2. Similar procedures are followed to generate data
transmission paths and flow between all ingress relays. The
parameter Bre2
re denotes the total bandwidth from ingress relay
Re,re to ingress relay Re,re2.
C. Flow Allocation Algorithm
Algorithm 2 presents the flow allocation algorithm in de-
tail. The primary objective is to identify a path that offers
the highest synchronization while maintaining relatively low
latency. It should be noted that the number of inter-satellite
Algorithm 1 Ingress Relay Selection Algorithm
1: Initialization: Node ←S, Re
0 ←∅, ∀e ∈E, u ∈Ue
2: for t=1,2,3,...,T do
/* Establish the links. */
Update(V is) in slot t
for each new attendee u ∈Ue do
Ue.addUser(u)
end for
G ←UpdateGraph(Node ∪U, V is)
for each e ∈E do
/* Devide users into different regions. */
region set ←Region_Divider(Ue, G)
for each re ∈region set do
/* Obtain top-k nodes close to the geo-central. */
cu set ←Top_k(Ue,re, G)
Re,re
←arg mincu∈cu set{L(cu, Ue,re)}
/* Switch the control unit in the current slot. */
if ∥Re,re
−Re,re
t−1∥≥∆or ∃new attendee then
for each u ∈Ue,re do
/* Allocate flows. */
Flow(u, Re,re
)←allocate(G, u,
Re,re
, Bup
Flow(Re,re
, u)←allocate(G, Re,re
u, Bdown
end for
for each other Re,re2
t do
Flow(Re,re
, Re,re2
←allocate(G, Re,re
, Re,re2
, Bre2
re )
Flow(Re,re2
, Re,re
←allocate(G, Re,re2
, Re,re
, Bre
re2)
end for
else
Re,re
←Re,re
end if
end for
end for
32: end for
links (ISLs) cannot exceed the number of transmission units
on the satellite, making paths with the maximum activated
links a priority. In this algorithm, the latency is determined
solely by the number of hops. Paths with more hops between
two nodes result in higher latency. It is also assumed that there
may be several potential paths with the same number of hops
between two nodes.
The algorithm initially employs Dijkstra’s Algorithm to
search for alternative paths with the same minimum number
of hops between node i and node j in graph G. If any of
these paths fail to meet the bandwidth capacity or ISL number
requirements specified in III-D, they are skipped and removed
from consideration. Subsequently, the algorithm counts the
number of activated links for each path and selects the path
that covers the maximum number of activated links as the
optimal path denoted by best.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Algorithm 2 Flow Allocation Algorithm
1: Function allocate(G, i, j, B)
2: Flow(i, j)←∅, all path ←DijkShortest(G, i, j)
3: for each path ∈all path do
path.ActivatedNum ←0
for each (m, n) ∈path do
if Bremain
≤B or P
k∈S xmk ≥λ or P
k∈S xnk ≥λ
then
break, remove path from all path
end if
if xmn = 1 then
path.ActivatedNum++
end if
end for
13: end for
14: best ←arg maxp∈all path(p.ActivatedNum)
15: for each (m, n) ∈best do
xmn = 1, ymn
= 1, Bremain
= Bremain
Flow(m, n).Update(ymn
ij )
G.Update(xmn, Bremain
19: end for
20: Return Flow(i, j)
Finally, the algorithm activates all inactivated links in the
chosen best path, updates the remaining bandwidth, and
allocates the flows between nodes i and j. The result is an
efficient allocation of flows that meet the desired criteria.
V. EVALUATIONS
A. Experiment Setup
1) Setup for LEO satellite constellations: We use the sim-
ulator [2] to run STK [19] and obtain the trajectories of the
Starlink (Phase 1) constellation. This constellation comprises
24 orbits and 1584 LEO satellites positioned at an altitude of
approximately 550km.
In accordance with the system model defined in Section III,
we set λ = 4, k = 5, and ∆= 1000km for inter-satellite links
(ISLs). The bandwidth capacities of ISLs and user-satellite
links (USLs) are set to 10Gbps and 5Mbps, respectively. Each
user’s upstream bandwidth in a session is randomly initialized
within the range of 2Mbps to 4Mbps. As for the division of
regions, we set Nmax to 50 and dmax to 1000km.
2) User traffic generation: To better simulate real-world
scenarios, we generate 5000 users on the Earth’s lands, taking
into account the global population distribution [20]. These
users are randomly assigned to either an ongoing session or a
new session is created for them. The entry time of each user
into the session is also randomly generated.
B. Comparison Approaches
As for comparison, we consider two other benchmarks,
SpaceRTC and VIA.
• SpaceRTC [1] is a cloud-satellite coorperated solution
for low-latency problems. One control unit among satel-
lites and cloud bases is selected for each session, and flow
End-to end latency(ms)
SpaceMeta
SpaceRTC
(a) CDF for latency of different schemes.
SpaceMeta
SpaceRTC
End-to-end latency(ms)
(b) Boxplot for latency of different schemes.
Fig. 2: Performance comparison of SpaceMeta with other
benchmarks.
is generated through the path with the lowest latency and
most activated links.
• VIA [3] is a purely cloud-based scheme based on prior
state-of-the-art cloud-relay selection study. It uses history
performance to predict performance and gains the most
promising top-k control unit options. It then selects the
best one and stores the results back in the session history.
C. Performance Comparison of Latency and Synchronization
We set the weight parameter α in Eq. 2 to 5 and then
examine the end-to-end latency between every two users,
comparing the results with SpaceRTC and VIA.
The CDF of latency is shown in Figure 2(a). On average,
SpaceMeta reduces latency by 6.72% compared to SpaceRTC.
The results are quite close because both methods consider
paths on satellites. The slightly lower latency of SpaceMeta is
attributed to its multi-server selection scheme, which short-
ens flow paths between some distant users. Additionally,
SpaceMeta reduces latency by 40.67% on average compared to
VIA. This improvement can be mainly attributed to the larger
number of LEO constellation sites and higher space utilization
rate in SpaceMeta, making it more conducive to optimal route
planning.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Different alpha values
End-to-end latency(ms)
Fig. 3: Latency performance with different values of α.
The boxplot of latency is depicted in Figure 2(b). SpaceMeta
reduces the Interquartile Range of latency by 39.50% and
80.28% compared with SpaceRTC and VIA, indicating that
SpaceMeta achieves higher synchronization. The result vali-
dates the effectiveness of SpaceMeta’s region-division method,
as it highly synchronizes users in the same region.
D. Impact of Synchronization-latency Weight Parameter
To further assess the performance of SpaceMeta under dif-
ferent conditions, we vary the weight parameter α to different
values. Specifically, we compare the latency distributions for
α = 1, 5, 10, 20. As illustrated in Figure 3, a larger value of
α leads to higher synchronization but higher average latency.
The reason behind this phenomenon is that Algorithm 1 tends
to prefer ingress relays with similar path lengths rather than
shorter ones. Thus, a trade-off is needed between achieving
high synchronization and maintaining low latency. It is also
evident that setting α = 5 strikes a good balance between high
synchronization and low latency.
VI. CONCLUSION
The emergence of LEO satellite constellations presents a
promising solution to support multi-user virtual interaction,
enabling low latency and global coverage. In this paper, we
study the server selection problem for global-scale multi-user
virtual interaction applications over LEO satellite constella-
tions. We present SpaceMeta to jointly optimize latency and
synchronization, represented as latency discrepancy, among
users. A greedy algorithm is designed to determine ingress
servers and data transmission paths for each session. Experi-
ments on real-world scale LEO constellations demonstrate that
SpaceMeta can reduce the latency by up to 40.67% on average
and reduce the interquartile range of latency by up to 80.28%
when compared to benchmarks. Our study sheds light on the
promising direction of supporting global-scale massive multi-
user virtual interaction, also known as metaverse, via LEO
satellite constellations.
REFERENCES
[1] Z. Lai, W. Liu, Q. Wu, H. Li, J. Xu and J. Wu, ”SpaceRTC: Unleashing
the Low-latency Potential of Mega-constellations for Real-Time Com-
munications,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM, London, United Kingdom, pp.
1339-1348, 2022.
[2] Z. Lai, H. Li and J. Li, ”StarPerf: Characterizing Network Performance
for Emerging Mega-Constellations,” in Proc. IEEE ICNP, Madrid, Spain,
pp. 1-11, 2020.
[3] J. Jiang et al., “VIA: Improving Internet Telephony Call Quality Using
Predictive Relay Selection,” in Proc. ACM SIGCOMM, Florianopolis,
Brazil, vol. 16, pp. 286-299, 2016.
[4] S. Fouladi, J. Emmons, E. Orbay, C. Wu, R. S. Wahby, and K. Winstein,
“Salsify: Low-Latency Network Video through Tighter Integration be-
tween a Video Codec and a Transport Protocol,” in Proc. USENIX NSDI,
USA, pp. 267-282, 2018.
[5] T. Ma et al., ”UAV-LEO Integrated Backbone: A Ubiquitous Data
Collection Approach for B5G Internet of Remote Things Networks,” in
IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 39, no. 11, pp.
3491-3505, November 2021.
[6] J. Ma, B. Shang, H. Song, Y. Huang and P. Fan, ”Reliability Versus
Latency in IIoT Visual Applications: A Scalable Task Offloading Frame-
work,” in IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 9, no. 17, pp. 16726-
16735, September 2022.
[7] R. Wang, X. Tang, Q. Wang, G. Liu, R. Ma and G. Feng, ”Maximum
Rate Based Relay Selection and Power Allocation Method for Relay
Satellite Networks,” 2021 International Wireless Communications and
Mobile Computing (IWCMC), Harbin City, China, pp. 248-253, 2021.
[8] H. Shuai, K. Guo, K. An and S. Zhu, ”NOMA-Based Integrated Satellite
Terrestrial Networks With Relay Selection and Imperfect SIC,” in IEEE
Access, vol. 9, pp. 111346-111357, 2021.
[9] Y. Zhu, M. Sheng, J. Li and D. Zhou, ”Delay-throughput tradeoff in
satellite data relay networks with prioritized user satellites,” in China
Communications, vol. 17, no. 11, pp. 219-230, November 2020.
[10] O. Haq, C. Doucette, J. W. Byers, and F. R. Dogar, ”Judicious QoS
using cloud overlays,” in Proc. ACM CoNEXT, New York, NY, USA, pp.
371–385, 2020.
[11] D. Berger, B. Berg, T. Zhu, M. Harchol-Balter, and S. Sen, “RobinHood:
Tail Latency Aware Caching- Dynamic Reallocation from Cache-Rich
to Cache-Poor RobinHood: Tail Latency-Aware Caching - Dynamically
Reallocating from Cache-Rich to Cache-Poor,” in Proc. USENIX OSDI,
USA, pp. 195-212, 2018.
[12] E. Cheslack-Postava et al., “A Scalable Server for 3D Metaverses.” in
Proc. USENIX ATC’12, USA, 2012.
[13] P. Stotko, S. Krumpen, M. B. Hullin, M. Weinmann, and R. Klein,
“SLAMCast: Large-Scale, Real-Time 3D Reconstruction and Streaming
for Immersive Multi-Client Live Telepresence,” IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics, vol. 25, no. 5, pp. 2102–2112,
2019.
[14] D. Van Huynh, S. R. Khosravirad, A. Masaracchia, O. A. Dobre and
T. Q. Duong, ”Edge Intelligence-Based Ultra-Reliable and Low-Latency
Communications for Digital Twin-Enabled Metaverse,” in IEEE Wireless
Communications Letters, vol. 11, no. 8, pp. 1733-1737, 2022.
[15] T. Chen, H. Zhou, H. Yang and S. Liu, ”A Review of Research on
Metaverse Defining Taxonomy and Adaptive Architecture,” 2022 5th In-
ternational Conference on Pattern Recognition and Artificial Intelligence
(PRAI), Chengdu, China, pp. 960-965, 2022.
[16] D. Frey, J. Royan, R. Piegay, A. Kermarrec, E. Anceaume and F. Fessant,
”Solipsis: A Decentralized Architecture for Virtual Environments,” 1st
International Workshop on Massively Multiuser Virtual Environments,
Reno, NV, United States, vol.1, 2008.
[17] Steam,
“VRChat
Steam
Charts,”
Steamcharts.com,
2019.
https://steamcharts.com/app/438100.
[18] Statista, “The statistics portal for market data, market research and
market studies,” Statista.com, 2022. https://www.statista.com/
[19] “Ansys STK — Digital Mission Engineering Software,” www.ansys.com.
https://www.ansys.com/products/missions/ansys-stk.
[20] “World Population Distribution by Latitude and Longitude,” Engag-
ing Data, Mar. 19, 2019. https://engaging-data.com/population-latitude-
longitude/.