Call to Protect the 
Dark and Quiet Sky from 
Harmful Interference  
by Satellite Constellations

--- PAGE BREAK ---

This document outlines the position of the International 
Astronomical Union (IAU) Centre for the Protection of the 
Dark and Quiet Sky from Satellite Constellation Interference 
(CPS) regarding the impact of low-earth-orbit (LEO) 
satellite constellations on scientific and public access to 
the night and radio sky. The intended audience includes 
government organisations, space industry, the public, and 
the astronomy community. While it does not delve into 
technical details extensively, it focuses on presenting the 
overall context, key concepts and recommendations.
The document comprises sections at three levels of 
detail, with the Executive Summary providing the briefest, 
the chapter Summary and Recommendations a more 
comprehensive, and the main body of the document a 
detailed explanation of the position of the CPS. As the 
situation with LEO satellites is constantly evolving, the 
CPS may issue an update to this position in the future.
To get in touch about this document, 
please contact policy@cps.iau.org
The views expressed in this document are those 
of the IAU CPS and may not necessarily reflect the 
opinions of the individual contributors or the affiliated 
Institutes mentioned in the Acknowledgements..
Published 14 March, 2024

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Table of Contents
Executive Summary
Introduction: Low-Earth-orbit Satellite Constellations and Astronomy
The Importance of Astronomy and Astrophysical Research
Scientific significance
Technological significance
Cultural significance
Economic and societal significance
The Impacts of LEO Satellite Constellations on Astronomy
Visibility of satellites in the sky
Impact of reflected sunlight on observations
Radio astronomy
Proposed Measures and Mitigation Strategies
Astronomy community mitigations
Collaboration with industry
Voluntary codes of conduct
Regulatory Measures
Spectrum management
Environmental law
Cultural protection
Regulatory supervision
Technical measures
Summary and Recommendations
Summary
Recommendations
References
Acknowledgements

--- PAGE BREAK ---

[ EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ]
1 In the following we refer to the radio-quiet sky as simply the ‘quiet sky’.
The growing number of satellite constellations in low 
Earth orbit (LEO) enhances global communications and 
Earth observation, and support of space commerce is 
a high priority of many governments. At the same time, 
the proliferation of satellites in LEO has negative effects 
on astronomical observations and research, and the 
preservation of the dark and quiet sky. These satellite 
constellations reflect sunlight onto optical telescopes, 
and their radio emission impacts radio observatories, 
jeopardising our access to essential scientific discov-
eries through astronomy. The changing visual appear-
ance of the sky also impacts our cultural heritage and 
environment. Both ground-based observatories and 
space-based telescopes in LEO are affected, and there 
are no places on Earth that can escape the effects of 
satellite constellations given their global nature. The 
minimally disturbed dark and radio-quiet sky1 is crucial 
for conducting fundamental research in astronomy and 
important public services such as planetary defence, 
technology development, and high-precision geolocation.
Some aspects of satellite deployment and opera-
tion are regulated by States and intergovernmental 
organisations. While regulatory agencies in some 
States have started to require operators to coordi-
nate with their national astronomy agencies over 
impacts, mitigation of the impact of space objects on 
astronomical activities is not sufficiently regulated.
To address this issue, the CPS urges States 
and the international community to:
1)	 Safeguard access to the dark and 
quiet sky and prevent catastrophic 
loss of high quality observations.
2)	 Increase financial support for astronomy to 
offset and compensate the impacts on obser-
vatory operations and implement mitigation 
measures at observatories and in software.
3)	 Encourage and support satellite operators and 
industry to collaborate with the astronomy 
community to develop, share and adopt best 
practices in interference mitigation, leading to 
widely adopted standards and guidelines.
4)	 Provide incentive measures for the space 
industry to develop the required technology to 
minimise negative impacts. Support the estab-
lishment of test labs for brightness and basic 
research into alternate less reflective materials 
and reduction of unwanted radiation in the 
radio regime for spacecraft manufacturing.
5)	 In the longer term, establish regulations and 
conditions of authorization and supervision 
based on practical experience as well as the 
general provisions of international law and 
main principles of environmental law to codify 
industry best practices that mitigate the neg-
ative impacts on astronomical observations. 
Satellites in LEO should be designed and 
operated in ways that minimise adverse effects 
on astronomy and the dark and quiet sky.
6)	 Continue to support finding solutions to 
space sustainability issues, including the 
problem of increasing space debris leading 
to a brighter sky. Minimising the production 
of space debris will also benefit the field of 
astronomy and all sky observers worldwide.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

INTRODUCTION: LOW-EARTH-ORBIT  
SATELLITE CONSTELLATIONS  
AND ASTRONOMY
In recent years, numerous projects to deploy large 
‘constellations’ of small satellites have been proposed 
by the satellite industry and by governments.
A satellite constellation is a set of spacecraft that share 
a common design, distributed across different orbits 
to provide a service and geographical coverage that 
cannot be achieved by a single satellite [1]. Applications 
of satellite constellations range from civil and military 
telecommunications to remote sensing and Earth 
observation, global navigation, and meteorology.
As of the end of 2023, there are more than 5000 satel-
lites from large constellations in low Earth orbit (LEO) 
[2]. Filings in respect of over one million satellites 
at the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) 
indicate an ambition for possibly hundreds of thou-
sands of satellites in LEO in the coming decade [3].
Astronomy today is conducted by almost 1000 largely 
publicly funded observatories and spacecraft, ranging 
from small metre-size telescopes to large-scale projects 
like the Square Kilometre Array and the Extremely Large 
Telescope, worth billions of dollars. Tens of thousands 
of astronomers around the world use such facilities 
to make scientific discoveries that benefit humanity. 
The professional community is complemented by an 
even larger amateur community, with commercially 
available equipment capable of supporting critical 
amateur–professional scientific collaboration. As a 
result of the ability to easily view the night sky and 
make important discoveries even with modest equip-
ment, astronomy remains one of the most accessible 
sciences, particularly for developing countries.
The negative impact of artificial satellites on astronomy 
has been an issue for many years. However, the paradigm 
shift to an industrial use of LEO, with an expected 20- to 
100-fold increase in the number of satellites, is becoming 
a much larger threat to science. The visibility and bright-
ness of a satellite depend on the altitude of its orbit, its 
size, shape and surface reflectivity, its orientation with 
respect to an observer, and the orbital configuration of the 
system. LEO satellites reflect sunlight and can be detected 
as moving spots, particularly at twilight. Satellites at 
higher altitudes are visible for much of the night. They 
emit radio waves ubiquitously and can outshine cosmic 
sources by millions of times, which becomes an issue 
when they appear in direct line of sight to a radio tele-
scope. The growth of LEO satellites has a direct impact 
on professional and amateur astronomy, and, without 
appropriate mitigations, it will have a significant and 
detrimental effect on the dark and quiet sky across the 
globe, even rendering some observations impossible.
Industry leaders have made substantial investments 
to reduce the optical and radio visibility of their satel-
lites. They are entering into agreements with individual 
national governments to explore efforts to do so [4]. 
At the time of writing, the effort seems to be making 
progress. Measurements in 2023 of the brightness of 
SpaceX’s Starlink Generation 2 mini-satellites have 
shown that the visibility in operational orbit with the 
specular coatings and darkening efforts is reduced 
compared to the satellites initially deployed in 2019, 
although bright Generation 2 satellites at final orbital 
height can still be observed [5]. There are many other 
satellite constellations in development, however, which 
will require brightness mitigations and partnerships with 
the astronomy community to validate those mitigations.
Satellite companies are developing various constellations 
to provide internet and telephony access, as well as Earth 
monitoring, some of which utilise dedicated ground-based 
antennas as user terminals. This growing novel and dense 
communication ground segment is in itself an added 
source of radio interference. More recently, there are 
growing efforts to develop systems that connect directly 
to common mobile/cell phone handsets. These satellites 
have a much larger surface area compared to those sys-
tems designed to connect to larger, less mobile ground 
stations. Without mitigation, these new satellites could 
outshine even the brightest stars and planets in the opti-
cal regime [6]. Currently, without voluntary cooperation, 
radio-quiet zones around sensitive radio telescopes are 
also not protected from satellite emissions, in particular 
direct downlinks. Moreover, the widespread transmis-
sion of radio signals, as well as unintended radiation 
in the radio regime in all directions, adds progressively 
more noise to the radio interference background [7].

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE IMPORTANCE OF ASTRONOMY  
AND ASTROPHYSICAL RESEARCH
Astronomy plays an irreplaceable role in advancing 
fundamental physics and driving technological inno-
vation in current and future industries. It serves as an 
accessible avenue for technical and scientific research 
and education in developing and developed countries. 
Earth-based astronomy is essential for providing the 
high-precision celestial reference frame needed for 
navigation and geodesy, monitoring potentially harmful 
space weather, and detecting and tracking potentially 
hazardous asteroids, comets and interstellar objects.
SCIENTIFIC SIGNIFICANCE
Both historically and in the present, astronomical 
observations have driven breakthroughs in the under-
standing of the physical Universe and the mathematics 
required to describe it. Likely influenced by criticism 
of the Ptolemaic cosmology by the Persian and Syrian 
astronomers Al-Urdi, Al-Tusi and Ibn al-Shatir — all 
members of Maragheh observatory funded in what was 
then Mongolia, now Iran — Copernicus revived the idea 
that the Earth orbits around the Sun and not vice versa. 
Kepler’s laws of the motions of the planets were the first 
mathematical description of a physical phenomenon, 
subsequently bolstered by Galileo’s first observations of 
the heavens through a telescope. Newton developed a 
whole modern branch of mathematics to connect those 
motions to physical laws. All those giant leaps in scientific 
understanding depended entirely on direct observation 
of the cosmos under the dark sky. Einstein’s general 
theory of relativity, which posits that mass changes the 
shape of space, was initially validated by observations 
of the apparent shift in the positions of stars close to the 
Sun during a solar eclipse. Today’s observations of black 
holes and gravitational waves probe the fundamental 
nature of gravity itself. The existence of Dark Matter 
and Dark Energy, the main constituents of our Universe, 
has been inferred through astronomical experiments. 
Continued recognition of these critical contributions to 
fundamental understanding is exemplified by the fact 
that half of the Nobel Prizes in Physics awarded between 
2017 and 2022 went to astronomers and astrophysicists.
Although we cannot predict the specific outcomes of 
today's fundamental research, history leads us to expect 
that it will significantly impact technological innovation 
and society in the coming decades and centuries. 
Furthermore, astronomy's aesthetic appeal often serves 
as a means to engage young individuals in scientific and 
technical subjects. The accessibility of astronomy, cou-
pled with the allure of the night sky, offers opportunities 
for both developed and developing nations worldwide.
TECHNOLOGICAL SIGNIFICANCE
Astronomy has driven technological innovations in 
imaging and image processing now found in many 
aspects of everyday life, including medical imaging, 
mobile phone cameras, telecommunication, airport 
scanners and high-sensitivity radio receivers.
The positive impact of astronomy on the development 
of new disruptive technologies and the economy is 
even more direct. For example, digital photography 
and WiFi technology have been pioneered in astron-
omy, as well as various medical image processing 
techniques. The next generation of observatories are 
driving innovations in ‘big data’, by creating tech-
niques to process vast amounts of scientific data.
Fundamental discoveries are possible with small-aperture 
telescopes of modest cost. While LIGO made the first 
detection of gravitational waves, their origin was identified 
by a large number of small telescopes providing optical 
confirmation. Some of the first known exoplanets were 
discovered with telescopes smaller than 0.25 metres. 
Astronomy hence offers a low-cost entry point to fun-
damental physics and technological development.
CULTURAL SIGNIFICANCE
Culturally, astronomy holds immense significance as it is, 
and has always been, deeply intertwined with the knowl-
edge and daily lives of different societies across time. 
Celestial observation forms the basis of rich mythological 
and religious narratives across cultures. Archeological 
sites dating back to Neolithic and Chalcolithic times, to at 
least 6000 BCE, bear witness to connections to the sky, 
and numerous cultural artefacts depict stellar constella-
tions. Ancient civilisations and many documented early 
human settlements developed astronomical observatories 
and built early astronomical knowledge for their daily 
lives, technology advances, and cultural and religious 
development. Major modern religions refer to the stars in 
their holy books, and many religious and cultural groups 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

still depend on access to the night sky for wayfinding, 
ritual timekeeping, and more. Astronomical discovery was 
the origin of the fundamental transformation in western 
civilisation that led to the blossoming of exact sciences, 
which would later be called the Copernican revolution. 
Astronomical discovery permeates popular culture through 
compelling imagery as well as imaginative science fiction. 
Advertisements feature astronomical imagery, and commer-
cial products are named after astronomical objects. Access 
to the natural dark sky is a key component of many cultural 
practices [8]; thus preserving and protecting a pristine night 
sky are crucial for safeguarding our cultural heritage.
ECONOMIC AND SOCIETAL 
SIGNIFICANCE
Beyond fundamental research and technical development, 
astronomy has substantial economic implications.
Astronomy is an important component of many gov-
ernments' space objectives and plans, along with other 
space-based activities, including the satellite commu-
nications and Earth sensing sectors. Ground-based 
astronomical observatories play a critical role in protecting 
our society’s infrastructure and even life on Earth.
In order to provide navigation services for GPS receivers 
on Earth and also spacecraft operating in Earth orbit and 
beyond, we need precise knowledge of the Earth’s shape 
and location. This is challenging, as Earth continuously 
changes its shape and orientation on various scales. 
We can measure minute shifts of Earth’s shape and 
spin by knowing the positions of radio telescopes on 
the ground and the orientation of the Earth’s rotation 
axis; this is done by observing a number of extremely 
distant radio sources (quasars), beacons of relativistic 
particles emanating from black holes. This forms the 
single most reliable reference system against which 
other navigation systems can be calibrated.
Observations of the radiation from these quasars with a 
terrestrial network of radio telescopes establish the basis 
for navigation, precision geolocation, continental drift 
measurements, climate change monitoring, and biodiversity 
assessment. These observations then require corrections 
supplied by the theory of general relativity — another 
discovery fundamentally supported by astronomy — for 
these precise applications. This service is currently a 
free contribution, financed by States, that provides an 
invisible foundational support to the worldwide economy.
Astronomical observations are also essential for 
monitoring space weather. Understanding the local 
space environment is vital for much of the modern 
economy, with infrastructure worth billions of dollars or 
euros at stake. Adverse space weather events can, for 
example, affect power grids on the ground and disable 
spacecraft in any orbit, potentially causing catastrophic 
cascades of destruction. With space weather monitoring, 
countermeasures can be initiated, and astronomy again 
provides a pivotal service to the worldwide economy.
Our planet has experienced multiple catastrophic 
impacts with asteroids and comets in the past [9]. 
Despite substantial international efforts, we still know 
only a fraction of the potentially hazardous objects 
that can enter Earth’s atmosphere and cause local 
devastation [10]. Discovering unknown objects and 
monitoring the highly non-linear trajectories of near-
Earth objects is the prime purpose of planetary defence, 
which relies primarily on optical telescopes.
Additionally, astro-tourism is developing a positive 
economic impact on rural communities in many 
countries [11]. Astro-tourists seek out sites with 
minimum impact from ground-based light pollution, 
desiring unhindered views of the natural night sky.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE IMPACTS OF LEO SATELLITE 
CONSTELLATIONS ON ASTRONOMY
Satellite-induced light and radio pollution affects the 
night sky globally. This environmental impact means 
that a pristine night sky is being affected everywhere 
in the world by satellite reflections and space debris. 
Even traditionally remote observatory locations will 
be affected just as severely as any other area.
Figure 1: Bright streak left in an astronomical image of a group of galaxies with the Hubble Space Telescope. The streak 
was generated by a satellite crossing the field of view during the exposure. Courtesy of NASA/STScI [13].

--- PAGE BREAK ---

VISIBILITY OF SATELLITES IN THE SKY
Most satellites in LEO are constructed of materials that 
reflect sunlight and as a result they can often be seen 
by the unaided eye. Depending on the satellite's alti-
tude, orientation, and surface characteristics, and the 
darkness of the viewing site, these reflections can be 
observed throughout the entire night. The larger satellites 
that are intended to communicate directly with cellular 
phones are expected to be among the brightest objects 
in the night sky if mitigations are not implemented.
Efforts have been made by industry to identify and develop 
novel approaches to spacecraft design and mechanisms 
to reduce the brightness of satellite systems. However, the 
technology to reduce brightness is still in its early stages 
and is not yet broadly adopted by all constellation oper-
ators and consequently many systems already deployed 
are often visible to the naked eye in a moderately dark 
sky. The proposed and deployed LEO satellite systems 
are causing changes in the appearance of the night sky 
worldwide, impacting the cultural heritage associated 
with it in every country and every location on Earth [12].
IMPACT OF REFLECTED SUNLIGHT ON 
OBSERVATIONS
LEO communication satellites, at their current levels 
of brightness, will adversely affect optical and infrared 
astronomical observations by reflecting sunlight.
As satellites move across the sky, they can reflect sunlight 
and leave bright streaks on astronomical images (see Figure 
1). Depending on the brightness, such interference has the 
potential to invalidate whole datasets. Satellites in lower 
orbits enter the Earth's shadow earlier after sunset, ceasing 
to reflect sunlight to the ground and disappearing from 
view, at least from the perspective of an optical observer. 
Generally, the lower the orbit, the shorter the period of visi-
bility after twilight, although the visible period also depends 
strongly on the geographical latitude of the observatory and 
the season. Orientation, size and the reflectivity of the mate-
rials it is made of also play important roles in determining the 
brightness of a satellite as seen by astronomical observers.
Depending on the field of view of the telescope (the por-
tion of the sky it observes), it might not be possible to 
avoid the negative impact of streaks of reflected sunlight 
on professional and amateur astronomical observations, 
particularly in twilight. Studies show that the extent of the 
impact depends on the telescope’s characteristics, science 
plans, and observing strategies. For instance, simulations 
that assume some 60 000 LEO satellites in realistic orbital 
configurations predict that Vera C. Rubin Observatory, 
hosting a large optical telescope with a wide field of view 
that is scheduled to commence operations in 2024, may 
be impacted by at least one satellite streak on up to 30% 
of observations at the beginning and end of each night 
[14]. Current asteroid population models suggest that 
unknown potentially hazardous objects reside in greater 
numbers in locations that are accessible only through 
observations conducted during twilight, shortly after sunset 
or before sunrise. But it is exactly during twilight that the 
sky is most affected by LEO satellite constellations [15].
The combined effect of current satellites in orbit and 
the accumulation of space debris may already be 
causing an approximately 10% increase in the bright-
ness of the night sky compared to natural levels [16]. 
This exceeds the classification threshold established 
by the International Astronomical Union (IAU) in 1979, 
which should not be surpassed at large astronomical 
observatory sites. Consequently, the effective sensi-
tivity of optical and infrared astronomical telescopes 
on Earth may have already decreased as a result 
of the unprecedentedly high activity in LEO.
Any increase in space debris resulting from the grow-
ing use of low Earth orbits also impacts astronomy. 
Sunlight reflecting off debris brightens the night sky in 
a similar way to nearby city lights increasing the level 
of light pollution. Even small reflections from uncon-
trolled objects in LEO will also cause false detections 
of transient events of astrophysical interest [17].
In addition to constellations of many smaller satellites,  
there is a growing interest in larger structures in 
space, including space-based solar power systems, 
LEO space habitats, and larger satellites that con-
nect directly to mobile phone handsets. Without 
countermeasures, all these plans would result in 
sources of even greater interference to astronomy.
Unmitigated LEO satellite systems, with a steadily 
increasing density in the sky, are hence a threat to 
optical and infrared astronomy, and therefore to a 
fundamental driver of science and technology

--- PAGE BREAK ---

RADIO ASTRONOMY
As in the optical, satellites can also reflect radio emis-
sions from the Sun or terrestrial anthropogenic radio 
signals towards radio telescopes, resulting in a reduced 
quality of observations and the loss of data. Far more 
significant, however, are the active radio transmissions 
by the satellites and the unnecessary leakage of radiation 
from on-board electrical equipment and electronics.
Even a perfect radio transmitter will always produce some 
emissions at frequencies outside the designated carrier 
signal's band. These can be reduced with filters or other 
techniques, but only to a certain level. Better suppression 
is usually tied to increased effort and thus costs. The same 
is true for the emissions of an antenna. While most of 
the power is beamed towards a certain area — the main 
beam — there is always a fraction of the power that goes 
into other directions (see Figure 2). This means that any 
transmitting satellite visible to a radio observatory will cause 
a signal with the potential to disrupt radio observations, even 
at frequencies other than the nominal carrier frequencies of 
the satellite. The strength of the detected signal depends 
on the pointing orientation of both systems. As they move 
over the sky, satellites can appear in the direct line of sight 
of a radio telescope, which will amplify their emissions by 
a huge factor compared to terrestrial transmitters, which 
are usually located at (or behind) the horizon. Furthermore, 
even in the most remote observing sites, far from terrestrial 
transmitters, satellites will still be high in the sky and will 
be a potential source of harmful interference. This results 
in distortions of astronomical measurements, from sub-
noise-level features that can become apparent with long 
observing times (e.g., multi-year observations of the cosmic 
microwave background) to the loss or prevention of entire 
datasets. In extreme cases, spaceborne Earth or weather 
exploration radars can damage radio astronomical receiver 
systems [18]. Satellite emissions can also mimic or interfere 
with observations of transient astronomical radio sources.
Large satellite constellations hence pose a challenge to 
the traditional operation of radio observatories. Many 
observations make passive use of a wide range of fre-
quencies outside of those explicitly allocated for radio 
astronomy by international regulation. This includes bands 
explicitly allocated for use by satellite systems. Radio 
astronomy’s passive observation in these bands does 
not interfere with other uses of the spectrum. However, 
observations at these frequencies are affected by active 
transmissions by other users and there are no official rights 
of protection from interference from authorised services.
These opportunistic observations of cosmic radio sources in 
parts of the spectrum not allocated to radio astronomy are 
in many cases made possible thanks to national or regional 
protection zones, as well as geographical separation and 
natural shielding against terrestrial anthropogenic radio 
emissions. However, no existing or potential radio obser-
vatory sites benefit from such protection zones in the case 
of satellite constellations, which are designed to transmit 
signals to everywhere on Earth. No international regula-
tion exists to protect those zones or radio observatories 
outside the limited bands allocated to radio astronomy.
Furthermore, the aggregate unintended radiation or 
leakage radiation emitted by electronic systems on 
satellites is less regulated and can occur in bands 
allocated to radio astronomy. This leads to, at best, a 
significant loss in sensitivity and may severely affect 
certain ground-based radio observations [7].
Low-level sidelobe emission 
in all directions, potentially 
affecting radio telescopes
Main beam emission
towards intended target zone
Figure 2: Illustration of the illumination pattern of antennas of satellites in large constellations. The radiation is emit-
ted not only in the intended direction, but also at lower power level in a much wider cone, at some level even in 
any direction. Since radio telescopes are, to some extent, also susceptible to radio emission from any direction, 
they detect emission from all satellites that are above the horizon. Image credit: IAU CPS/NOIRLab/SKAO.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

PROPOSED MEASURES AND  
MITIGATION STRATEGIES
ASTRONOMY COMMUNITY MITIGATIONS
Most data for astronomical and planetary science 
research come from ground-based observatories, as 
do those used for planetary defence and a census of 
orbiting objects. In addition, major observatories are 
funded by international consortia; there are currently 
40 large ground-based optical telescopes with primary 
mirrors between 3 and 11 metres in diameter, representing 
a worldwide investment. In contrast, there is only one 
telescope this size in space. Facilities in space cannot 
replace ground-based telescopes, owing to a wide vari-
ety of prohibitive technical and cost challenges [19].
Astronomers are working to mitigate data loss 
due to satellite constellation interference in the 
optical/infrared and in the radio regime.
Support is required for the development, deployment 
and maintenance of software packages to identify and 
mask out satellite streaks. Accurate predictions of the 
positions of satellites on the sky in a given direction 
and at a given time of night are essential. Those can 
accelerate identification of streaks in wide-field images 
without requiring a blind search of the full image. Some 
satellites will be so bright that they must be avoided on 
the basis of such predictions, in order to prevent the 
complete loss of an image. Development is required for 
applications to make access to operator-supplied position 
data routinely available to observatories. Coordinated 
observations of the apparent brightness of constel-
lation satellites provide feedback to operators on the 
effectiveness of their efforts to dim the spacecraft and 
can feed into the predictions to provide both position 
and brightness as they would impact a planned obser-
vation. The IAU Centre for the Protection of the Dark 
and Quiet Sky from Satellite Constellation Interference 
(CPS) provides the organising structure, but continuing 
support to observatories around the world is required.
Unwanted effects by human-made radio transmissions 
have affected radio astronomy since its inception. 
Accordingly, the astronomical community has always had 
to put significant resources into the implementation of 
various countermeasures, a long-standing, ongoing effort. 
Three methods can be used. The simplest is to avoid the 
impeding signal. However, the possibility of minimising 
direct observations of satellites at radio frequencies by 
sophisticated observation strategies is more limited than 
in the optical regime, as radio antennas are susceptible 
to radio emission from the entire sky. Even if the sensi-
tivity decreases rapidly beyond the pointing direction, 
it never vanishes. A second method, subtracting the 
interfering signal from astronomical observations, has 
been attempted, but with very limited success. To achieve 
good results, each interfering signal should be observed 
to a better accuracy than the astronomical source, which 
is virtually impossible. The third method is the removal 
of both the astronomical signal and the interfering signal 
when the latter occurs, and then restricting any analysis to 
the remainder of the data. The task is to identify the false 
signals from interfering sources, and several techniques 
have been developed. They can be slightly optimised 
if the satellite's position is known well enough, again 
an effort being undertaken in the scope of the CPS.
All mitigation methods have in common that the deg-
radation of the astronomical signal cannot be avoided, 
ranging from an increase of the noise against which 
a signal needs to be detected, over false detection of 
astronomical sources, to the total loss of the observation.
In both the optical and the radio regime, further resources 
are needed by astronomers and the satellite community to 
develop new, and optimise existing, mitigation strategies 
and techniques so that they are affordable, accessible 
and effective. Many governments actively support the 
development of space activity broadly, including the 
use of satellite-delivered services, satellite launch and 
manufacturing and investments in ongoing scientific 
discovery in optical and radio astronomy. Considering 
the interdependencies of the space ecosystem and the 
consequences for astronomy and space sustainability 
generally, mitigation then becomes a whole-of-gov-
ernment balancing challenge, and ongoing support 
from government is necessary to find and implement 
effective solutions for all parties concerned to coexist.
COLLABORATION WITH INDUSTRY
Satellite constellation systems are being launched 
and deployed more rapidly than before, as a result of 
more efficient spacecraft manufacturing, improved 
access to launch facilities, competitive market 
forces, and international and national regulations

--- PAGE BREAK ---

that require a certain percentage of a constellation to be 
deployed within specified time periods. As a result of this 
rapid deployment and the absence of binding regulations 
to mitigate impacts on astronomy, the IAU and the most 
impacted observatories have prioritised direct collaboration 
with operators to explore and develop mitigations in this new 
field of technology. This collaboration has already produced 
several innovative solutions and ideas, which some operators 
are already implementing and sharing with the community.
Industry leaders have pledged to make, and have made, 
substantial investments [20] to reduce the optical and radio 
visibility of their satellites. Several constellation operators 
have begun applying these best-practice mitigations vol-
untarily, and certain governments are now requiring their 
licensees to enter into agreements to explore mitigations in 
collaboration with the astronomy community. Despite this 
work, at the time of writing there is no mitigation approach 
that has successfully reduced the brightness of a LEO 
satellite to the quantitative target level recommended by the 
astronomy community (see Box 1). Further work is required 
to explore other mitigation options available to satellite 
constellation operators and predictive tools. Government 
support is needed to establish a network of test labs that 
can predict brightness from prototype satellites, as is avail-
able for radio frequency testing, and also basic research to 
assess alternative materials that may reduce brightness.
The CPS encourages industry to continue collaborating with 
the astronomy community and encourages governments 
to find ways to facilitate and support this collaboration: 
developing brightness mitigations; sharing precise posi-
tional data to coordinate with observations; implementing 
suppression measures of unwanted radiation; and other 
measures. The CPS also encourages companies to work 
together and share solutions to support astronomy, and 
encourages States to put in place incentive measures to 
help satellite operators to develop the required technology 
to achieve maximal mitigation of interference with astron-
omy and the dark and quiet sky. Companies and States 
are also encouraged to collaborate with their national 
astronomical societies and the CPS, which has established 
an Industry and Technology Hub specifically to encour-
age industry collaboration and sharing of mitigations.
VOLUNTARY CODES OF CONDUCT
The space sector is actively reviewing, updating and initiating 
best practices, voluntary codes of conduct and regulatory 
norms to support a space ecosystem that features multiple 
large satellite constellations, as well as other novel space 
activities. Examples include the Inter-Agency Space Debris 
Coordination Committee (IADC) space debris mitigation 
guidelines, the Space Safety Coalition’s Best Practices 
for the Sustainability of Space Operations, the Long Term 
Sustainability Guidelines developed by the United Nations 
Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space (UN 
COPUOS), the Code of Conduct for Space Sustainability of 
the Global Satellite Operators Association (GSOA), and the 
ESA Zero Debris Charter. These guidelines related to space 
sustainability offer space actors the flexibility to adopt best 
practices and promote responsible behaviour without impos-
ing rigid constraints, and serve to inform governments in the 
development of policy and regulation in the longer term.
The CPS encourages space sector actors to incorporate 
mitigations for reducing impacts on the dark and quiet 
sky and astronomy as part of their consideration of good 
corporate citizenship and environmental social governance 
(ESG) principles, and to participate in public systems 
such as the Space Sustainability Rating (SSR) [21].
The SSR, as one example of these public systems, provides 
a new and innovative way of addressing orbital challenges by 
encouraging responsible behaviour through a rating system 
informed by a transparent, data-based assessment of the 
level of sustainability of space missions and operations. The 
SSR system supports space actors, such as governments, 
space agencies, and commercial companies, in understand-
ing the impact of their activities on the space environment, 
and identifying opportunities to minimise those impacts.
In 2022 the development of a Dark and Quiet Sky module 
was initiated in the SSR to enhance the rating system, 
with the support of the CPS Policy Hub [22]. The primary 
objective of this module is to develop a quantification meth-
odology to evaluate the impact of satellites on astronomical 
observations, for both optical and radio astronomy.
REGULATORY MEASURES
Analysis of international space law documents, in partic-
ular the Outer Space Treaty (OST) [23], and the relevant 
discussions in international fora (e.g., UN COPUOS) 
demonstrate that astronomy constitutes a lawful form of 
accessing, exploring and using outer space. Likewise, the 
deployment of satellite constellations is a lawful form of using 
outer space, and operators have a legal right to transmit 
signals in their assigned frequency bands as determined 
by the spectrum management processes convened under 
the ITU. Unlike the ITU system, which allocates different 
portions of the electromagnetic spectrum to different 
users, including radio astronomy, the OST confers no hier-
archy of priority for space activities; accordingly, balance 
and coordination must be found between astronomical 
observations and satellite constellation activities.
Many States are developing new regulatory approaches to 
approve and supervise national space activities, including 
satellite constellations, as part of their obligations as parties 
to the OST and as members of the ITU, and in compliance 
with general principles of international law. Regulations 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

typically focus on launch safety, spectrum allocations and 
usage, and mitigations of space debris and conduct of safe 
on-orbit operations. With the exception of the limited, pre-ex-
isting protections for radio astronomy under the ITU and in 
some instances by implementing protection zones under 
national law, and a more recent practice by the US Federal 
Communications Commission (FCC) to require non-geosta-
tionary satellite operators to reach coordination agreements 
relating to science impacts with NASA and the US National 
Science Foundation, States do not presently consider the 
impacts on ground- or space-based astronomical sites.
There are four domains in which the CPS encourages 
States to explore the development of regulatory mit-
igations: spectrum management, environmental law, 
cultural protection and regulatory supervision.
SPECTRUM MANAGEMENT
The ITU Radio Regulations (RR) [24] are maintained and 
regularly updated by the ITU, the oldest UN agency. The 
RR have the status of an international treaty and aim to 
regulate the use of the radio spectrum internationally to 
prevent harmful interference between different radio services, 
considering that radio waves can propagate over long 
distances. Radio astronomy is recognised as one service 
among others. This recognition reflects the significant 
investments made by countries in constructing and oper-
ating radio observatories and the associated infrastructure. 
Consequently, the RR define different levels of protection 
for radio astronomy in specific frequency bands, ranging 
from binding international protection to recommendations to 
protect radio astronomy in national law. National regulators 
adopt the RR into national law and police them, including 
the mandatory protection of astronomy. As the spectrum 
management process has been well established over many 
years, a number of spectrum management organisations 
and radio observatories advocate for radio astronomy 
and interface with national and ITU spectrum bodies.2
However, while offering some shelter, the existing 
regulations require a substantial update in sev-
eral aspects to sufficiently protect radio astronomy 
in the era of large satellite constellations.
The first aspect is a regulatory measure, which can be 
addressed within the ITU. Adherence to the regulations 
protecting astronomy in its allocated bands is neither 
checked centrally by the ITU nor structured to take aggre-
gate effects into account through international forward 
planning. While a simple limit to the interference from 
single constellations exists (2% loss of data), and a simple 
limit to the interference from all satellite constellations 
exists (5% loss of data), no procedure is in place that 
2 Scientific Committee on Frequency Allocations for Radio Astronomy and Space Science (IUCAF) [25]; Committee on Radio Astronomy 
Frequencies (CRAF) [26]; Square Kilometre Array Observatory (SKAO) [27]; International Astronomical Union (IAU); Committee 
on Radio Frequencies (CORF) [28]; Radio Astronomy Frequency Committee in the Asia-Pacific region (RAFCAP) [29].
regulates how the burden to limit the aggregate impact 
is shared among constellation operators. This may lead 
to a situation where the aggregate signal of multiple 
satellite constellations from different States transgresses 
protection levels for astronomy in an uncontrolled way.
Secondly, the RR protect only a small portion of the radio 
spectrum used for radio astronomical measurements. Some 
States therefore implement additional radio-quiet zones 
around radio observatories, in which radio emissions have 
to be suppressed within selected bands or across the whole 
radio spectrum, not necessarily protected by international 
regulation. However, the current radio-quiet zones defined 
at the national level do not account for satellite emissions, 
and radio telescopes lack protected access to frequencies 
beyond the small portion allocated to radio astronomy.
Thirdly, while there exist international electro-
magnetic compatibility (EMC) compliance stan-
dards to regulate leakage radiation from devices 
operated on Earth's surface, no international equiv-
alent has yet been introduced for spacecraft. [7].
The effect of the reflection of radio signals by satellites from 
the Sun and ground-based sources requires further study.
The CPS recommends that States:
•	 Observe and strengthen the protection of radio 
astronomy from satellite constellations in radio bands 
allocated to radio astronomy by developing appro-
priate measures in the ITU Radio Regulations.
•	 Recognise that modern radio astronomy requires 
broadband spectrum protection beyond the allocated 
narrow frequency bands in the ITU Radio Regulations, 
and hence that national and international regulatory 
protection from large satellite constellations is also 
required to preserve and create specific geographic areas 
designated as radio-quiet zones around telescopes.
•	 Develop and adopt a global electromagnetic com-
patibility (EMC) standard for unintended radiation 
from the electronics of satellites in large constellations 
which recognises the protection of radio astronomy.
•	 Support studies to investigate the impact of reflections of 
solar radiation and of terrestrial signals from satellites in 
large constellations that can impact on radio astronomy.
ENVIRONMENTAL LAW
Article III of the OST specifies that activities in the explo-
ration and use of outer space should be carried out in 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

accordance with international law, part of which includes 
environmental law. A number of legal instruments exist 
that could be applied to the issue of unintended pollution 
from satellite constellations in the context of light pollution 
and unwanted radio emissions. For example, the 1979 
Geneva Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air 
Pollution uses a broad definition of pollution, which includes 
energy released via human activities. Dark and quiet sky 
impacts add to a growing number of issues associated 
with uncontrolled satellite constellation activities, including 
broader ecological and environmental impacts [30].
The CPS encourages States to:
•	 Consider how tenets of international environmen-
tal law, such as the precautionary principle, the 
‘polluter pays’ principle, the prevention of trans-
boundary harm, and the principle of sustainable use 
should be applied to activities in outer space, and 
particularly to those taking place in LEO [31].
CULTURAL PROTECTION
Some countries make provision to protect the night sky from 
the impact of light pollution from terrestrial sources. There 
is a rich diversity among peoples throughout the world who 
have societal, economic, and cultural interests in the explo-
ration and use of outer space, including dark and quiet skies.
The CPS encourages States to:
•	 Find mechanisms to recognise the night sky as 
part of our common cultural heritage and include 
its protection from satellite interference.
REGULATORY SUPERVISION
When States licence space launches, whether public or 
private sector, they have a responsibility under the OST to 
authorise and continually supervise the activities of space-
craft for their complete duration, from launch, over operation, 
to de-orbiting. States must also exercise due regard to the 
on-orbit operational phases of satellite operations and the 
potential impact they may have on the environment and 
society. States are also responsible for regulating private 
actors to ensure their compliance with international law and 
principles through the imposition of relevant requirements 
for the authorisation and supervision of space activities.
For the visible spectrum, international regulation has not 
been seen as a requirement, since ground-based lighting 
seems to impact only the regional environment, although 
its impacts can extend beyond national borders [7]. 
Historically, light pollution has been addressed through 
national or more local regulation. Optical communication 
systems and ground-to-space lasers are less prone to 
interference, thus making coexistence questions less 
important than in the radio domain. However, large satellite 
constellations and other emerging projects in LEO, with 
optical reflections affecting astronomical infrastructure 
across national borders, require a paradigm change.
The CPS recommends that government authorities 
responsible for the authorisation and supervision 
of the launch and operation of satellites require an 
impact assessment, with as much public informa-
tion as possible, and base their subsequent licensing 
decision on criteria covering but not limited to:
•	 An analysis of brightness with the best tools available, 
and the guidance of the industry, taking into account 
the quantitative limits defined in this document;
•	 An analysis of the cumulative radio emis-
sions from intended emission and uninten-
tional electronic noise, including strategies to 
minimise the impact on radio-quiet zones;
•	 Requirements for operational positional data 
sharing to mitigate impacts on astronomy;
•	 Consideration of the balance between mis-
sion objectives, orbital sustainability, and 
interference on other space activities;
•	 Requirements for careful, interdisciplin-
ary environmental assessment.
Furthermore, governments should continue to find ways 
to bring the matter of the dark and quiet sky to the 
attention of the UN COPUOS and its sub-committees, 
and work towards bilateral or multilateral agreements 
as a stepping stone towards international regulation.
TECHNICAL MEASURES
Several measures to ensure space sustainability 
are also relevant for astronomy. Policy makers and 
industry are encouraged to implement these.
To support the dynamic growth in LEO projects, govern-
ments are escalating their Space Domain Awareness (SDA) 
activities to identify, track and monitor spacecraft and debris 
to aid in collision avoidance and increase space situational 
awareness. The introduction and further development of an 
international, publicly available, electronic orbital register for 
LEO satellites, with rapidly updated orbital parameters, will 
allow astronomical observatories to predict the occurrence 
and locations of satellites in the sky and may be used to mit-
igate their negative impact by avoiding observations of fields 
with a high density of satellites. Interest in collision avoidance 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

and debris mitigation is already driving the development of 
private-sector and governmental systems for SDA and traffic 
management. Space debris can affect observations similarly 
to satellites themselves. In some instances, the fidelity of 
data required by astronomers may exceed that required by 
satellite operators for their on-orbit collision avoidance.
The CPS encourages States to:
•	 Consider astronomy requirements when devel-
oping SDA programmes and to increase the 
accuracy of space debris location and channel 
that information into astronomy databases.
•	 Obligate satellite operators to assess the impact of 
their system on astronomy, to share space location 
information with internationally-available SDA plat-
forms, and to adopt the prevailing best practices and 
available technical measures to protect astronomy.
•	 Support the evolving tools and technology for brightness 
mitigation by establishing test labs to predict brightness 
from prototypes and to perform basic research in less-re-
flective alternative materials for spacecraft fabrication.
•	 Support the development of techniques to suppress 
radio emission in unwanted directions and at unwanted 
frequencies from satellite transmission systems.
•	 Support the development of techniques to suppress 
unwanted electromagnetic radiation from satellites.
As space debris will affect astronomy by increasing back-
ground brightness [16], measures to avoid its increase 
will also benefit astronomy. These measures should be 
geared towards avoiding an increase in background 
brightness by more than 10% above the natural levels. 
The short-term allocation of orbits and the enforcement 
of fast and reliable deorbiting strategies are therefore of 
great interest to astronomy. In addition, as constellation 
operators improve their technological approaches to 
lowering brightness and limiting unintended radio detect-
ability, the expectation is that they will incorporate these 
improvements into the satellites if replacement is needed.
In addition to the general space-sustainability rules, the 
CPS encourages administrations to implement regu-
lations to specifically protect astronomy and the night 
sky. The most urgent measures are listed below.
While the presence of satellites during astronomical 
observations will always have a detrimental effect, the 
worst (loss of whole exposures or damage to the elec-
tronics) can be prevented if satellites in the lowest orbits 
are not visible to the naked eye and if they become 
dimmer with increasing altitude. The latter requirement is 
a consequence of a reduced angular speed at increased 
altitude; the single affected receiver pixels are exposed for 
longer to the satellite reflections, and therefore a dimmer 
satellite has the same detrimental effect. The CPS has 
formulated comprehensive technical criteria for adop-
tion. The most important thing for optical astronomy is 
to limit the brightness of satellites, as given in Box 1.
Another important concern for astronomy is the visibility of 
satellites during the darkest part of the night. For the specific 
criterion of limiting that visibility for the locations of the world’s 
largest research telescopes, the recommendation is to have 
constellation orbits that stay below roughly 600 km [32].
To better protect radio astronomy, high-quality transmission 
systems should be used to illuminate only targeted cells on 
Box 1: The IAU recommendation 
to limit satellite brightness
The IAU recommends a visual brightness limit for LEO satellites 
in operational orbit: satellites should never be visible to the 
naked eye, and the maximum allowed brightness should be 
lower with increased altitude. Although satellites do appear 
fainter when they are farther away from the Earth, that effect is 
somewhat offset by their apparently slower movement across 
the sky at greater altitudes. This is expressed in the formulas
Vmag > 7.0
if SatAltitude ≤ 550 km,
Vmag > 7.0 + 2.5 × log10(SatAltitude / 550 km) if SatAltitude > 550 km,
for both photopic magnitude as well as Johnson V magnitude m. 
The magnitude Vmag is a measure of the brightness in the visible 
regime, where photopic is visually perceived and the Johnson 
system is filter-defined and calibrated. SatAltitude is the altitude of 
the satellite above sea level. A higher value of Vmag corresponds to a 
dimmer object. Figure 3 illustrates the acceptable brightness limit.
Figure 3: Brightness limit of LEO satellites as proposed 
by the IAU. The vertical axis denotes Vmag. [31]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the ground without spilling emission into their surroundings, 
as well as effective filters to restrict the radio emission to 
the bands used for the radiocommunication, in order to 
avoid unwanted emission in frequency bands used for 
radio astronomy. Leakage radiation from non-transmitting 
parts of the satellites should be suppressed effectively.
The CPS encourages States to oblige satellite operators to 
enact technical measures to protect astronomy. In particular, 
reflections of sunlight towards optical telescopes should 
be avoided, and technical measures should be imple-
mented to constrain emission spatially and in frequency. 
Rules for electromagnetic compatibility of spacecraft with 
terrestrial equipment (radio telescopes) are required, such 
as that the aggregate unwanted radiation from satellites 
stays at a level that does not entail harmful interference 
to radio astronomy. Protection zones for astronomical 
facilities extending into space should be considered.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

[ SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS ]
SUMMARY
In recent years, the cost of access to space has been 
reduced significantly, opening the doors for full com-
mercial utilisation. Commercial satellite companies and 
governments have endeavoured to launch large-scale 
space missions with the aim of supplying individual, 
commercial and government customers worldwide 
with broadband internet, Earth-observation data, and 
other applications. While undoubtedly improving life 
for many customers, there are some negative conse-
quences. Astronomy and the uninterrupted access to 
the night sky are among the most affected fields.
This document is addressed to government administra-
tions, the space industry, the public, and astronomers and 
presents a summary proposal to implement mitigations 
to reduce and eliminate the impact of low-Earth-orbit 
(LEO) satellite constellations on scientific and cultural 
access to the night sky. It is not meant to cover the 
detailed discussion of technical aspects, but high-
lights the context and the most important concepts.
•	 LEO satellites, deployed in large numbers, reflecting 
light from the Sun as well as being visible to infrared 
and radio detectors, have become a threat to the 
dark and quiet sky and will have negative impacts on 
astronomy, fundamental science, and wider society.
•	 The dark and quiet sky is a requirement for fun-
damental research and technology development, 
and programmatic observations contributing 
to key priorities like planetary defence, and is 
essential for basic services like geolocation.
•	 Without countermeasures:
○LEO Satellites will appear as numerous mov-
ing objects in the night sky, visible to the 
unaided eye much of the time, effectively 
transforming the view of the stars;
○LEO Satellites will have a significant and, in 
some cases, severe impact on astronomical 
observations, including those searching for 
potentially hazardous asteroids or comets 
and those used to calibrate geolocation and 
observations used to calibrate geolocation;
○Radio transmissions and unintended elec-
tromagnetic radiation from satellites will 
have a significant and in some cases 
severe impact on radio astronomy.
•	 Large LEO constellations hence compromise the 
effectiveness of astronomical infrastructure and are 
detrimental to national investments in astronomy, 
scientific discovery, technical spinoff, and fundamental 
services to society, scientific discovery, technical 
spinoff, and fundamental services to society..
•	 The undisturbed dark and quiet sky is part of our 
cultural heritage that requires and deserves protection.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

RECOMMENDATIONS
•	 The CPS encourages States and the international 
community to make every practical effort to prevent 
the catastrophic loss of high quality observations of 
the dark and quiet sky through establishing regula-
tions and terms of licensing that require operators to 
exercise due regard for global visibility and to mitigate 
the impacts on observational astronomy through:
○A visual magnitude limit as described in Box 1, ensur-
ing the invisibility of LEO satellites to the naked eye 
and mitigating some data loss in observations, initially 
on the basis of best efforts until technology is mature;
○Addressing optical visibility over the full mission 
lifetime, including orbit raise and de-orbit;
○Implementing and policing existing international 
regulation and strengthening the protection of 
radio astronomy from satellite constellations in 
radio bands allocated to radio astronomy by 
developing appropriate measures in the ITU 
Radio Regulations and on a national basis;
○Recognising that modern radio astronomy 
requires broadband spectrum protection beyond 
the allocated narrow frequency bands in the 
ITU Radio Regulations, and hence that national 
or international regulatory protection also from 
satellite constellations is required to maintain the 
efficiency of radio quiet zones around telescopes;
○Introducing a global electromagnetic compat-
ibility (EMC) standard for unintended radiation 
from the electronics of satellites, which recog-
nises the protection of radio astronomy;
○Proper implementation of the relevant tenets 
of the OST and its elaborating conven-
tions and the ITU Radio Regulations;
○Consideration of the applicability of the envi-
ronmental legal framework to outer space 
and activities conducted therein, for the pur-
pose of protecting astronomy and mitigating 
impacts on Earth's ecological systems;
○Space sustainability laws limiting the generation 
of space debris and facilitating a fast deorbit-
ing strategy, with the purpose of limiting the 
global increase in diffuse sky background to 
no more than 10% artificial contribution;
•	 The CPS recommends that government author-
ities responsible for licensing the launch and 
operation of satellites require an impact assess-
ment and base their subsequent licensing deci-
sion on criteria covering but not limited to:
○An analysis of brightness taking into account the 
quantitative limits defined in this document, based 
on well-measured materials reflection properties;
○An analysis of the cumulative radio emissions 
and unintentional electronic noise, includ-
ing strategies to minimise the impact on 
radio-quiet zones and telescope sites;
○Requirements for operational data sharing 
to mitigate impacts on astronomy; and
○Consideration of the balance between mis-
sion objectives, orbital sustainability, and 
interference on other space activities.
•	 The CPS encourages States to take a whole-of-gov-
ernment approach to supporting and encouraging 
development of mitigations of the impact on astronomy:
○Support astronomical observatories to develop, 
test, and operate required mitigation techniques to 
minimise the impact of large satellite constellations;
○Implement incentive measures for industry to 
develop and implement technical and operational 
techniques to protect astronomy from the negative 
impacts of large satellite constellations, including 
predictive tools and test labs to assess brightness 
using designs or prototype satellites, and basic 
research on less-reflective alternate materials, as 
well as the reduction of radio radiation in unwanted 
directions and at unwanted frequencies.
•	 The CPS encourages the satellite industry to
○Continue the collaboration with astron-
omy to explore the effective co-existence 
of their services and astronomy;
○Share mitigation experiments and resources 
within the satellite industry community to 
spur the development of affordable, acces-
sible and effective mitigation options;
○Consider mitigating the impacts on astronomy 
as an essential component of their long-term 
sustainability and ESG approaches.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

[ REFERENCES ]
[1] Bassa, C. G., Hainaut, O. R. & Galadí-Enríquez, D. 2022, Analytical simulations of the effect of satellite constella-
tions on optical and near-infrared observations, A&A, 657, A75, https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/202142101
[2] Mc Dowell, J. 2023, Jonathan's Space Pages: Enormous (`Mega') Satellite 
Constellations, https://planet4589.org/space/con/conlist.html
[3] Falle, A., Wright, E., Boley, A. et al. 2023, One million (paper) satel-
lites, Science, 382, 150, https://doi.org/10.1126/science.adi4639
[4] National Science Foundation 2023, NSF statement on NSF and SpaceX Astronomy Coordination 
Agreement, https://new.nsf.gov/news/statement-nsf-astronomy-coordination-agreement
[5] Young, B. & Respler, J. 2023, Effect of upgrades to Starlink Generation 2 satel-
lites on visual brightness, Zenodo, https://doi.org/10.5281/ZENODO.8226279
[6] Nandakumar, S., Eggl, S., Tregloan-Reed, J. et al. 2023, The high optical brightness of the 
BlueWalker 3 satellite, Nature, 623, 938, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-023-06672-7
[7] Di Vruno, F., Winkel, B., Bassa, C. G. et al. 2023, Unintended electromagnetic radiation from Starlink satellites 
detected with LOFAR between 110 and 188 MHz, A&A, 676, A75, https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/202346374
[8] ​South African Radio Astronomy Observatory 2017, Shared Sky Exhibition: The SKA’s Indigenous 
Art/Astronomy Exhibition, https://www.sarao.ac.za/outreach/shared-sky-exhibition/
[9] Morgan, J. V., Bralower, T. J., Brugger, J. et al. 2022, The Chicxulub impact and its environmental conse-
quences, Nature Reviews Earth & Environment, 3, 338, https://doi.org/10.1038/s43017-022-00283-y
[10] Heinze, A. N., Denneau, L., Tonry, J. L. et al. 2021, NEO Population, Velocity Bias, and Impact Risk from an ATLAS 
Analysis, The Planetary Science Journal, 2, 12, https://doi.org/10.3847/psj/abd325 
[11] Barbosa, D., Coelho, B., Bergano, M. et al. 2022, Cyber-Cosmos: A new citizen science concept in a 
dark sky destination, Acta Astronautica, 200, 612, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actaastro.2022.09.008
[12] Venkatesan, A., Lowenthal, J., Prem, P. et al. 2020, The impact of satellite constellations on space as an 
ancestral global commons, Nature Astronomy, 4, 1043, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41550-020-01238-3
[13] Space Telescope Science Institute 2023, Example of Satellite Trail in Hubble Space Telescope Exposure, 
https://www.stsci.edu/contents/media/images/2023/017/01H1Q4K5J650PPH3HM9Y88N7TA?news=true
[14] Williams, A., Hainaut, O., Otarola, A. et al. 2021, Analysing the Impact of Satellite Constellations and ESO’s Role 
in Supporting the Astronomy Community, The Messenger, 184, 3, https://doi.org/10.18727/0722-6691/5237
[15] Walker, C., Hall, J., Allen, L. et al. 2020, Impact of Satellite Constellations on Optical Astronomy and 
Recommendations Toward Mitigations, Bulletin of the AAS, 52, Issue 2, https://doi.org/10.3847/25c2cfeb.346793b8
[16] Kocifaj, M., Kundracik, F., Barentine, J. C. et al. 2021, The proliferation of space objects is a rapidly increas-
ing source of artificial night sky brightness, MNRAS Letters, 504, L40, https://doi.org/10.1093/mnrasl/slab030
[17] Michałowski, M. J., Kamiński, K., Kamińska, M. K. et al. 2021, GN-z11-flash from a man-made satellite not 
a gamma-ray burst at redshift 11, Nature Astronomy, 5, 995, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41550-021-01472-3

--- PAGE BREAK ---

[18] International Telecommunication Union 2014, Recommendation RS.2066-0 (12/2014): Protection of the radio astron-
omy service in the frequency band 10.6-10.7 GHz from unwanted emissions of synthetic aperture radars operating in 
the Earth exploration-satellite service (active) around 9 600 MHz, https://www.itu.int/rec/R-REC-RS.2066-0-201412-I
[19] Dark Sky Oases Working Group, Optical Astronomy working Group, Bioenvironment Working Group, 
Satellite Constellation Working Group, & Radio Astronomy Working Group 2022, Dark and Quiet Skies for 
Science and Society: Report and recommendations, Zenodo. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5898785
[20] SpaceX, Brightness Mitigation Best Practices for Satellite Operators, https://api.starlink.
com/public-files/BrightnessMitigationBestPracticesSatelliteOperators.pdf
[21] Space Sustainability Rating: leading the path towards a more sustain-
able use of space, https://spacesustainabilityrating.org/
[22] IAU CPS Policy Hub, https://cps.iau.org/policy-hub/
[23] United Nations 1967, Treaty on principles governing the activities of States in the exploration and use of outer 
space, including the moon and other celestial bodies (adopted 27 January 1967, entered into force 10 October 
1967) 610 UNTS 205, https://treaties.un.org/Pages/showDetails.aspx?objid=0800000280128cbd&clang=_en
[24] International Telecommunication Union 2019, Radio Regulations, http://handle.itu.int/11.1002/pub/814b0c44-en
[25] International Science Council Scientific Committee on Frequency Allocations 
for Radio Astronomy and Space Science, http://www.iucaf.org/
[26] European Science Foundation Committee on Radio Astronomy Frequencies, https://www.craf.eu/
[27] Square Kilometre Array Observatory, https://www.skao.int 
[28] US National Academy of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine Committee on Radio Frequencies, 
https://www.nationalacademies.org/our-work/committee-on-radio-frequencies
[29] Radio Astronomy Frequency Committee in the Asia-Pacific region 2011, https://www.atnf.csiro.au/rafcap/
[30] Gaston, K. J., Anderson, K., Shutler, J. D., et al. 2023, Environmental impacts of increasing numbers of arti-
ficial space objects, Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment, 21, 289, https://doi.org/10.1002/fee.2624
[31] Hall, J., Walker, C., Rawls, M. et al. 2021, SATCON2: Executive Summary, Bulletin 
of the AAS, 53, Issue 2, https://doi.org/10.3847/25c2cfeb.4554c01f
[32] Governments of Chile, Ethiopia, Jordan, Slovakia, Spain and the International Astronomical 
Union 2021, Recommendations to Keep Dark and Quiet Skies for Science and Society, COPUOS 
STSC Conference Room Paper A/AC.105/C.1/2021/CRP.17, https://www.unoosa.org/oosa/
oosadoc/data/documents/2021/aac.105c.12021crp/aac.105c.12021crp.17_0.html
For further details please consult these references:
Walker, C. & Benvenuti, P. (editors) 2022, Dark and Quiet Skies II Working Group 
Reports, Zenodo, https://doi.org/10.5281/ZENODO.5874725
The IAU CPS, Resources, https://cps.iau.org/further-reading/

--- PAGE BREAK ---

[ ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS ]
Gyula I. G. Józsa, MPIfR, Germany
Andrew Williams, ESO / IAU CPS, Intergovernmental Organisation
Richard Green, University of Arizona / IAU CPS, USA
Isabel Marsh, ESO, Intergovernmental Organisation
John Antoniadis, FORTH Institute of Astrophysics, Greece
Domingos Barbosa, ENGAGE SKA, Instituto de Telecomunicações, Portugal 
John Barentine, Dark Sky Consulting, LLC / IAU CPS, USA
Guillermo Blanc, Carnegie Institution for Science / Las Campanas Observatory, Chile
Aaron Boley, University of British Columbia / IAU CPS, Canada
Bruno, Coelho, ATLAR Innovation, Portugal
Patricia Cooper, Constellation Advisory, LLC, USA
Sara Dalledonne, ESPI, Austria
Federico Di Vruno, SKAO/IAU CPS, Intergovernmental Organisation
Joe Diamond, SKAO, Intergovernmental Organisation
Adam Dong, University of British Columbia, Canada
Ronald Drimmel, INAF, Italy
Siegfried Eggl, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign/IAU CPS, USA
Nusrin Habeeb, UAE University, UAE
Jessica Heim, University of Southern Queensland/IAU CPS, Australia
Chris Hofer, Amazon Kuiper, USA
Narae Hwang, KASI, Korea
Mathieu Isidro, SKAO / IAU CPS, Intergovernmental Organisation
David Koplow, Georgetown University, USA
James Lowenthal, Smith College, USA
Sara Lucatello, INAF, Italy
Mariya Lyubenova, ESO, Intergovernmental Organisation
Robert Massey, RAS, UK
Mike Peel, Imperial College London/IAU CPS, UK
Meredith Rawls, University of Washington/Rubin Observatory/IAU CPS, USA
Adrien Saada, Space Sustainability Rating, Switzerland
Alejandro Sanchez, Savestars Consulting S.L.,Spain
Pedro Sanhueza, DECYTI/MINREL, Chile
Warren Skidmore, TMT, USA
Boris Sorokin, SKAO/IAU CPS, Intergovernmental Organisation
P. Sreekumar, Manipal Center for Natural Sciences, India
Tim Stevenson, SKAO/IAU CPS, Intergovernmental Organisation
Paula Tartari, ESO/IAU CPS, Intergovernmental Organisation
Vincenza Tornatore, Politecnico di Milano, Italy
Connie Walker, NSF NOIRLab/IAU CPS, USA
Benjamin Winkel, MPIfR, Germany
Yana Yakushina, Ghent University, Belgium
The lead author’s participation in the development of this document was funded partly from the European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 101004719.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

On the front cover: A long-exposure image of the Orion Nebula 
with a total exposure time of 208 minutes showing satellite trails in 
mid-December 2019. Credit: A. H. Abolfath/NOIRLab/NSF/AURA