Supervised Learning for Analog and RF Circuit
Design: Benchmarks and Comparative Insights
Asal Mehradfar1, Xuzhe Zhao2, Yue Niu1, Sara Babakniya1, Mahdi Alesheikh2,
Hamidreza Aghasi2, Salman Avestimehr1
Abstract—Automating analog and radio-frequency (RF) circuit
design using machine learning (ML) significantly reduces the
time and effort required for parameter optimization. This study
explores supervised ML-based approaches for designing circuit
parameters from performance specifications across various cir-
cuit types, including homogeneous and heterogeneous designs.
By evaluating diverse ML models, from neural networks like
transformers to traditional methods like random forests, we
identify the best-performing models for each circuit. Our results
show that simpler circuits, such as low-noise amplifiers, achieve
exceptional accuracy with mean relative errors as low as 0.3%
due to their linear parameter-performance relationships. In
contrast, complex circuits, like power amplifiers and voltage-
controlled oscillators, present challenges due to their non-linear
interactions and larger design spaces. For heterogeneous circuits,
our approach achieves an 88% reduction in errors with increased
training data, with the receiver achieving a mean relative error
as low as 0.23%, showcasing the scalability and accuracy of
the proposed methodology. Additionally, we provide insights into
model strengths, with transformers excelling in capturing non-
linear mappings and k-nearest neighbors performing robustly in
moderately linear parameter spaces, especially in heterogeneous
circuits with larger datasets. This work establishes a foundation
for extending ML-driven design automation, enabling more
efficient and scalable circuit design workflows.
Index Terms—Analog Circuit Design, Machine Learning, Su-
pervised Learning, Design Automation, Radio Frequency Cir-
cuits, Millimeter-Wave Circuits, Wireless Transceivers, CMOS
I. INTRODUCTION
NALOG and radio-frequency (RF) circuit design serves
as a cornerstone of modern electronic systems, enabling
advancements in communication, sensing, and signal process-
ing applications. These circuits are integral to technologies
such as 5G wireless communications [1], automotive radar
systems [2], subsurface imaging [3], low-cost IoT devices
[4], large-scale quantum computing [5] and terahertz (THz)
spectroscopy [6]. However, as the semiconductor industry
confronts the limits of Moore’s Law [7], the design of analog
circuits has become increasingly challenging. Unlike digital
circuits, which benefit from highly automated and scalable
design methodologies [8]–[10], analog circuits demand exten-
sive manual effort due to intricate trade-offs between design
metrics such as power consumption, bandwidth, gain and
noise [11]–[13]. This complexity is further exacerbated by
1University of Southern California (USC), Los Angeles, CA 90089,
USA (e-mail: mehradfa@usc.edu; yueniu@usc.edu; babakniy@usc.edu; aves-
time@usc.edu).
2University of California, Irvine (UCI), Irvine, CA 92697, USA (e-mail:
xuzhez3@uci.edu; maleshei@uci.edu; haghasi@uci.edu).
the need to select suitable circuit topologies and optimize
parameters to meet tight performance specifications, a process
that often spans weeks or months and requires substantial
domain expertise [13], [14]. These challenges underscore the
critical need for innovative approaches to streamline analog
circuit design.
The application of machine learning (ML) techniques in
analog circuit design has gained significant momentum in
recent years. By learning the complex relationships between
design specifications (e.g., power consumption, bandwidth)
and circuit parameters (e.g., transistor sizes, capacitance),
ML models have shown potential to reduce the exhaustive
parameter sweeps required for circuit optimization [14]–[16].
Early works such as BagNet [14] and AutoCkt [15] demon-
strated the potential of neural networks and reinforcement
learning in synthesizing circuit parameters, reducing manual
design effort. However, these methods often focus on simple,
proof-of-concept circuits like single-stage amplifiers and fail
to scale effectively to real-world, multi-block systems.
More recent advancements have targeted complex analog
systems. AnGeL [16] proposed a semi-supervised learning
framework that integrates neural networks to improve data
efficiency and accelerate circuit parameter optimization. Simi-
larly, GCN-RL [17] utilized graph neural networks (GNNs)
to capture the topological relationships within circuits and
reinforcement learning to optimize transistor sizing, enabling
better generalization across circuit types.
In addition, [18] introduced a framework for designing
analog circuits to meet threshold specifications using a com-
bination of supervised learning and neural network-based
optimization. Their approach focuses on ensuring that gen-
erated designs meet critical performance metrics, providing a
practical solution for the accurate synthesis of analog circuits.
Despite these advances, many methods remain limited to
specific circuit types or lack comprehensive datasets, empha-
sizing the need for standardized benchmarks for robust model
evaluation and scalability testing.
To address these challenges, AICircuit [19] introduced a
comprehensive benchmark dataset for ML-assisted analog cir-
cuit design. This dataset encompasses homogeneous circuits,
such as amplifiers and mixers, as well as heterogeneous sys-
tems like transmitters and receivers, which consist of cascaded
circuit blocks with distinct functionalities. AICircuit evaluated
multiple ML algorithms, including traditional regressors (e.g.,
random forests, support vector regression) and modern deep
learning models (e.g., transformers, multi-layer perceptrons),
revealing their strengths and limitations in learning complex
arXiv:2501.11839v1  [cs.LG]  21 Jan 2025

--- PAGE BREAK ---

mappings between design metrics and circuit parameters.
Despite its contributions, the initial AICircuit work left sev-
eral key questions unanswered. For example, while it demon-
strated the feasibility of ML models for analog circuit design,
it did not thoroughly analyze model-specific performance
across different circuit types. Moreover, actionable insights
into selecting the most suitable ML algorithm for various
design scenarios were limited. To bridge these gaps, this paper
builds upon AICircuit with the following key contributions:
• Exploration of ML Model Dynamics: Comprehensive
descriptions of the ML models are provided, including
their architectures, training protocols, and performance
nuances for specific circuit categories.
• Enhanced Evaluations: Aggregated and performance-
specific comparisons are presented, supported by addi-
tional tables and plots, offering a holistic view of each
model’s strengths and weaknesses.
• Guidelines for Algorithm Selection: We provide ob-
servations on the suitability of different ML methods
for distinct circuit types, empowering researchers and
practitioners to make informed decisions when adopting
ML in analog design workflows.
By extending the scope of AICircuit, this work aims to
establish a more comprehensive framework for AI-driven ana-
log and radio frequency (RF) circuit design, bridging the gap
between academic research and practical applications. This
work not only serves as a guide for researchers in ML-assisted
circuit design but also lays the groundwork for adopting
these methodologies in industry-scale analog design processes.
Through this analysis, we hope to provide a roadmap for
leveraging ML techniques to streamline and enhance the de-
sign process for both homogeneous and heterogeneous circuits.
To enable reproducibility, all datasets and corresponding code
are available at https://github.com/AvestimehrResearchGroup/
AICircuit.
II. PROBLEM STATEMENT
The design of analog and radio-frequency (RF) circuits is
a challenging process that often requires iterative parameter
tuning to meet desired performance specifications. Traditional
approaches, such as Bayesian optimization, have been ex-
plored to optimize circuit performance by guiding the param-
eter search using probabilistic models that balance exploration
and exploitation [20], [21]. While Bayesian optimization can
be effective for low-dimensional problems, it suffers from
significant limitations when applied to circuit design. The iter-
ative sampling process is computationally expensive, requiring
substantial resources to evaluate the design space. Addition-
ally, Bayesian optimization struggles with the complex and
non-linear relationships inherent in circuit parameter spaces,
making it impractical for real-world applications.
Reinforcement learning (RL) has also been explored as a
means of automating circuit design by iteratively learning
parameter updates through a reward system based on achiev-
ing performance targets [22]. However, RL-based methods
suffer from significant drawbacks: they require vast amounts
of training data, are computationally intensive, and demand
considerable resources to converge. Furthermore, RL’s reliance
on iterative exploration of the design space makes it time-
consuming, particularly in circuit design tasks where data
generation through simulation is expensive.
In contrast to these previous works, supervised ML algo-
rithms offer a more efficient alternative by leveraging pre-
collected datasets to learn a direct mapping from performance
specifications to circuit parameters, thereby eliminating the
need for iterative searches and reducing computational over-
head with greater scalability.
To build upon this, we adopt a new perspective on the
problem by reversing the conventional circuit design flow.
Instead of iteratively searching for circuit parameters to opti-
mize performance metrics, we directly model the relationship
between performance specifications and circuit parameters.
Specifically, given a desired performance vector x (e.g., power
consumption, bandwidth, gain), we predict a corresponding
set of circuit parameters y (e.g., resistances, capacitances,
transistor widths) using a machine learning model M. This
approach bypasses the need for computationally expensive
optimization techniques and allows for efficient design:
y = M(x),
The challenge of this problem lies in the fact that there
may exist multiple sets of circuit parameters y that satisfy the
same performance specifications x. However, in real-world
scenarios, the primary goal is not to identify all possible
solutions but rather to find a single set of parameters that
meets the desired performance requirements. This simplifies
the design process and ensures the practicality of the solution
for circuit designers.
In short, our approach leverages supervised machine learn-
ing to simplify the circuit design process significantly:
• Reverse Design Flow: ML-assisted design predicts cir-
cuit parameters from performance specifications, avoiding
the need for parameter sweeps or optimization routines.
• Diverse Models: We explore various ML models, in-
cluding multilayer perceptrons (MLPs), transformers, and
traditional methods such as decision trees, to learn the
mapping from specifications to circuit parameters.
• Circuit Diversity: We investigate the performance of
these models on a range of circuits, from fundamental
homogeneous blocks such as voltage amplifiers to het-
erogeneous systems like wireless transmitters.
By framing the problem as a direct mapping from perfor-
mance to parameters, we aim to overcome the limitations of
traditional optimization-based methods and provide a robust
and scalable approach to analog and RF circuit design.
A. Analytical ML Perspective
Let (x, y) ∼P(x, y) represent i.i.d. samples from a joint
distribution over inputs and outputs. The supervised learning
objective aims to solve
θ∗= arg min
E(x,y)∼P (x,y)[ℓ(fθ(x), y)],
where fθ(x) represents the ML model parameterized by θ,
mapping input x to its predicted output, and ℓ: Y × Y →

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R≥0 denotes the loss function. The function ℓmeasures the
prediction error between fθ(x) and the true output y. The
presence of explicitly paired (x, y) samples ensures that each
observed instance contributes a low-variance gradient signal
∇θℓ(fθ(x), y), directly guiding fθ toward a function that
minimizes expected error under P(x, y).
In contrast, unsupervised learning optimizes criteria that
depend solely on the input distribution P(x), without reference
to a ground-truth target y. Such criteria, often expressed as
minimizing divergences (e.g., D(P(x)∥Pθ(x))) or optimizing
surrogate objectives, do not inherently guarantee that the
discovered structures align with any specific predictive task.
Without a direct mapping between x and y, parameter updates
in unsupervised learning cannot explicitly reduce task-relevant
errors, resulting in models that capture irrelevant patterns or
converge to local minima that lack practical significance.
similarly
lacks
direct
sample-level
targets,
stead seeking to maximize expected cumulative returns
Eπθ [P
t γtR(st, at)]. The resulting optimization landscape is
shaped by sequential dependencies and often sparse or de-
layed rewards, producing high-variance gradient estimates and
complicating convergence. Moreover, credit assignment across
time and action sequences introduces structural complexity
absent in the supervised setting.
Therefore, the supervised approach leverages a known
joint distribution P(x, y) and a well-defined per-sample error
ℓ(fθ(x), y), yielding stable, directly interpretable gradient sig-
nals and tractable optimization. This fundamental alignment
of the learning objective with the underlying task’s data
distribution and explicit targets provides a clear analytical
advantage over both unsupervised and RL frameworks.
B. Application to Circuit Schematic Design
Consider the problem of sizing parameters in a circuit
schematic. Let x represent the performance metrics (e.g., gain,
bandwidth, power consumption) and y represent the design
parameters (e.g., transistor dimensions, bias voltages). By
performing a parametric sweep over y, we obtain a dataset of
pairs {(xi, yi)}, effectively mapping each performance metric
set to its associated parameter settings. The goal is to predict y
(design parameters) given a performance specification xtarget,
which naturally aligns with supervised learning.
Specifically, let fθ(x) represent a model that predicts the cir-
cuit’s parameter settings y given performance metrics x. This
framework leverages the known performance metrics xtarget.
Each sampled (x, y) pair, obtained from circuit simulations,
provides a direct gradient signal that adjusts θ to optimize
configurations yielding parameters y that achieve the desired
performance xtarget. The data generation process (parameter
sweeps) ensures (x, y) pairs reflect the circuit’s underlying
physics and variability, granting a stable and interpretable
mapping from performance metrics to parameters.
In contrast, unsupervised learning would only see the inputs
and outputs without a specific target. The model might find
correlations or clusters in the design parameter space, but
these patterns do not necessarily indicate optimal design
performance. Without a target specification, identifying which
configurations in x-y space correspond to the desired opera-
tional point remains ambiguous.
RL would treat circuit sizing as a sequential decision-
making process, evaluating returns based on rewards. How-
ever, parameter sizing for circuit design is often a one-shot
problem, where a given x (performance metrics) and y (design
parameters) pair is fully observable from a single simulation,
and there is no temporal sequence of actions. Introducing
RL would add unnecessary complexity, requiring policy ex-
ploration, handling delayed or sparse rewards, and incurring
a higher computational cost. Since the environment (circuit
simulations) is static and deterministic, directly fitting a model
to map x to y via supervised learning is more computationally
efficient and theoretically direct.
Thus, for circuit parameter sizing with performance targets,
supervised learning provides a structured, data-driven route to
optimal solutions, bypassing the ambiguities of unsupervised
criteria and the complexity of RL-based exploration strategies.
III. DATASET
This section describes the dataset collection process, which
encompasses both homogeneous and heterogeneous circuits.
To provide a comprehensive understanding of the data, we
first define the characteristics of homogeneous and heteroge-
neous circuits. Subsequently, we detail the procedure used to
generate the dataset for both categories.
A. Datasets for Homogeneous Circuits
Homogeneous circuits consist of a single type of circuit
block, such as a common-source voltage amplifier (CSVA).
These circuits are designed to perform a specific function,
making them simpler in structure and easier to analyze com-
pared to heterogeneous circuits. To capture a diverse range of
use cases, the dataset includes seven commonly used analog
and RF circuits: common-source voltage amplifier (CSVA),
cascode voltage amplifier (CVA), two-stage voltage amplifier
(TSVA), low-noise amplifier (LNA), mixer, voltage-controlled
oscillator (VCO), and power amplifier (PA). These circuits,
whose schematics are shown in Figure 1, represent fundamen-
tal building blocks for complex systems.
Among these circuits, the CSVA, CVA, and TSVA serve as
essential components for voltage amplification in analog and
feedback systems [23]. CSVA amplifies the input signal at
the gate and generates an output at the drain. CVA, which
combines common-source and common-gate stages, offers
enhanced gain and bandwidth suitable for high-frequency
applications. TSVA improves output swings and gain by
employing a two-stage amplification structure.
For RF applications, the dataset also includes LNAs, Mixers,
VCOs, and PAs, all of which are essential building blocks in
innovative and advancing wireless systems [24]. The LNA am-
plifies weak input signals while maintaining low noise across a
wide bandwidth, making it indispensable in RF receiver front-
ends. Mixers are responsible for frequency upconversion and
downconversion in RF transmitters and receivers, respectively.
VCOs generate periodic signals with tunable frequency, utiliz-
ing various topologies to provide negative resistances, e.g., the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

(a) CSVA
(b) CVA
(c) TSVA
(d) LNA
(e) Mixer
(f) VCO
(g) PA
Fig. 1. Schematics of homogeneous circuits: (a) Common-Source Voltage Amplifier (CSVA), (b) Cascode Voltage Amplifier (CVA), (c) Two-Stage Voltage
Amplifier (TSVA), (d) Low-Noise Amplifier (LNA), (e) Mixer, (f) Voltage-Controlled Oscillator (VCO), and (g) Power Amplifier (PA).
TABLE I
HOMOGENEOUS CIRCUITS AND THE CHOSEN PARAMETERS FOR EACH
CIRCUIT. THE SWEEPING RANGE OF SELECTED DESIGN PARAMETERS IS
WRITTEN IN THE FORM OF [BEG, INCREMENT, END].
Homogeneous Circuit
Parameter
Description
Sweeping Range
CSVA
specs:
dc power | bandwidth | gain
supply voltage
1.2:0.1:1.8 (V)
Vgate
gate voltage
0.6:0.05:0.9 (V)
load resistor
0.5:0.1:3 (kΩ)
width of nmos
3:1:10 (µm)
specs:
dc power | bandwidth | gain
load resistor
0.5:0.1:2 (kΩ)
width of nmos
6:1:17 (µm)
width of nmos
5:1:12 (µm)
width of nmos
4.5:0.5:9 (µm)
TSVA
specs:
dc power | bandwidth | gain
miller capacitor
150:50:250 (fF)
width of pmos
10:1:18 (µm)
width of pmos
7.5:5:22.5 (µm)
width of nmos
10:1:18 (µm)
width of nmos
7.5:5:22.5 (µm)
width of nmos
16:2:24 (µm)
specs:
dc power | bandwidth
| power gain | S11 | noise figure
output capacitor
300:100:600 (fF)
input capacitor
200:100:500 (fF)
drain inductor
3:1:5 (nH)
gate inductor
8.4:1:11.4 (nH)
source inductor
0.6:0.1:0.8 (nH)
width of nmos
25:1.25:30 (µm)
width of nmos
25:1.25:30 (µm)
Mixer
specs:
dc power | voltage swing
| conversion gain | noise figure
coupling capacitor
0.5:0.1:1.5 (pF)
load resistor
200:25:500 (Ω)
width of nmos
15:1:25 (µm)
width of nmos
5:1:15 (µm)
specs:
dc power | frequency
| phase noise | tuning range
| output power
capacitor in resonant tank
100:25:200 (fF)
inductor in resonant tank
2:1:6 (nH)
parallel resistor
1:1:4 (kΩ)
width of nmos
24:8:56 (µm)
width of nmos
11:1:12 (µm)
width of nmos
96:32:160 (µm)
Wvar
width of nmos capacitor
75:12.5:125 (µm)
specs:
dc power | S11 | S22
| power gain | PAE
| drain efficiency | Psat
input primary inductor
175:175:525 (pH)
input secondary inductor
40:40:120 (pH)
inter-stage matching inductor
87.5:87.5:263 (pH)
output primary inductor
238:238:714 (pH)
output secondary inductor
30:30:90 (pH)
width of nmos
16:3:28 (µm)
width of nmos
24:4:40 (µm)
cross-coupled configuration. PAs deliver substantial power to
transmitting antennas while ensuring high efficiency. Table I
summarizes the design parameters and their sweeping ranges
for homogeneous circuits.
B. Datasets for Heterogeneous Circuits
In addition to homogeneous circuits, we also investigate
heterogeneous systems, which comprise multiple circuit blocks
with distinct functionalities, such as a transmitter incorporating
VCO and PA. These circuits are more complex, as they inte-
grate different components to achieve multifunctional objec-
tives. This provides a richer dataset for analyzing interactions
between diverse circuits and their combined performance.
Specifically, we study a transmitter and a receiver system
operating at 28 GHz, commonly used in high-speed commu-
nication systems [25]. These systems combine blocks such
as VCOs, PAs, LNAs, Mixers, and CVAs. In the transmitter
system (Figure 2a), the VCO generates a periodic signal with
a tunable frequency governed by a control voltage, which is
then amplified by the PA to deliver sufficient power for signal
transmission. In the receiver system (Figure 2b), an LNA
amplifies the weak input signal while minimizing noise. A
Mixer converts the signal from radio frequency to intermediate
frequency (IF), and a CVA provides further amplification for
signal processing [13], [26]. Figure 3 illustrates the transceiver
system. Furthermore, the sweeping ranges for the design
parameters of heterogeneous systems are detailed in Table II.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

(a) Transmitter
(b) Receiver
Fig. 2. Schematics of the heterogeneous transceiver system: (a) Transmitter, (b) Receiver. These circuits represent key components of the transceiver chain,
designed to meet diverse performance specifications across varying tasks.
Fig. 3. Heterogeneous architecture of a 28 GHz wireless transceiver
highlighting functionality and design trade-offs for each block: The
transmitter (left) includes a voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO) and power
amplifier (PA). The receiver (right) consists of a low-noise amplifier (LNA),
mixer, and cascode voltage amplifier (CVA).
TABLE II
HETEROGENEOUS CIRCUITS AND THE CHOSEN PARAMETERS FOR EACH
BLOCK. THE SWEEPING RANGE OF SELECTED DESIGN PARAMETERS IS
WRITTEN IN THE FORM OF [BEG, INCREMENT, END].
Heterogeneous Circuits
Individual Block
Parameter
Sweeping Range
Transmitter System
specs:
dc power | bandwidth
| output power | voltage swing
Voltage-Controlled Oscillator (VCO)
specs:
phase noise | tuning range
50:50:150 (fF)
60:60:180 (pH)
300:100:500 (Ω)
7.5:2.5:12.5 (µm)
187.5:12.5:212.5 (µm)
Wvar
70:10:90 (µm)
Power Amplifier (PA)
specs:
power gain | drain efficiency | PAE
175:175:350 (pH)
60:60:120 (pH)
360:353:713 (pH)
45:45:90 (pH)
22:5:32 (µm)
16:5:26 (µm)
Receiver System
specs:
dc power | gain | noise figure
Low-Noise Amplifier (LNA)
specs:
power gain | S11 | noise figure
130:50:180 (fF)
170:50:220 (fF)
180:50:230 (pH)
850:100:950 (pH)
80:10:90 (pH)
20:3:26 (µm)
37.5:2.5:42.5 (µm)
Mixer
specs:
voltage swing | conversion gain
1:0.1:1.1 (pF)
400:100:500 (Ω)
14:2:18 (µm)
6:2:10 (µm)
Cascode Voltage Amplifier (CVA)
specs:
gain
300:100:400 (Ω)
26:2:30 (µm)
14:2:18 (µm)
C. Dataset Collection Procedure
To generate the dataset, we followed the procedure il-
lustrated in Figure 4. First, a schematic for each circuit
was designed using a 45 nm CMOS technology in Cadence
Virtuoso [27]. Then, key design parameters were identified
for each circuit, and sweeping ranges for these parameters
were defined in the format [beg, increment, end]. For every
parameter combination, simulations were performed using
Cadence Virtuoso to calculate the corresponding performance
metrics. Finally, the results were stored as rows in the dataset
table, where each row consists of circuit parameters and their
performance metrics.
Table III provides the dataset statistics for each circuit.
Compared to homogeneous circuits, heterogeneous systems
feature larger parameter spaces, highly non-linear interactions
between individual blocks, and intricate trade-offs within
the blocks and across the entire system. These complexities
significantly increase the challenge for ML models to learn
accurate mappings and necessitate a larger number of data
points to ensure robust and reliable performance.
IV. METHODOLOGY
The proposed design methodology, illustrated in Figure 5,
consists of three primary stages. The first stage is schematic
design, where circuit schematics are designed and key param-
eters are identified. In the second stage, ML model, supervised
machine learning models are trained to map performance
specifications to circuit parameters using the dataset gener-
ated from extensive simulations (Section III). Finally, in the
simulation and validation stage, the predicted parameters are
simulated to validate the model’s accuracy and ensure that
the performance metrics meet the desired specifications. This
end-to-end pipeline significantly reduces the manual effort
traditionally required in analog and RF circuit design by
leveraging the predictive power of machine learning models.
In this section, we present the methodology for predicting
circuit parameters from performance specifications using ML

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Select Circuit 
Parameters
Sweep in the 
Valid Range
Select One 
Parameter Set
Calculate 
Performance Metrics 
Parameters
Performance
Fig. 4. Procedure for creating dataset including homogeneous and heterogeneous circuits. This pipeline illustrates parameter selection, range sweeping,
simulation, and performance metric computation to generate the final dataset.
TABLE III
DATASET STATISTICS FOR EACH CIRCUIT.
Circuit
CSVA
TSVA
Mixer
Transmitter
Receiver
Dataset Size
7.8k
15.1k
19.3k
17.1k
13.5k
5.6k
95.3k
155.4k
Number of Circuit Parameters
Number of Performance Metrics
Schematic Design 
ML Model
Simulation and 
Validation
Fig. 5. Pipeline of the proposed design methodology including three stages:
(1) Schematic Design, where circuit structures and key design parameters
are defined; (2) ML Model, where ML models are trained to predict circuit
parameters from performance specifications; and (3) Simulation and
Validation, where the predicted parameters are validated through simulation
to ensure compliance with performance targets.
techniques. Our approach focuses on three main aspects: the
choice of models, the evaluation metrics, and the end-to-
end training and evaluation process. First, we describe the
ML models used to learn the mapping from performance to
circuit parameters, including neural networks and conventional
regression methods. Next, we outline the evaluation metrics
employed to assess the accuracy, robustness, and reliability of
the models, ensuring a comprehensive analysis of their perfor-
mance across various circuit types. Finally, we introduce the
end-to-end training and simulation-based evaluation pipeline,
which integrates ML predictions with circuit simulation tools
to validate the performance of predicted parameters.
A. Models
In this section, we describe the ML models employed to pre-
dict circuit parameters y from input performance specifications
x. These models include advanced deep learning techniques
and conventional regression methods chosen for their ability
to capture the complex, non-linear relationships inherent in
analog and RF circuit design. Specifically, we utilize the multi-
layer perceptron (MLP), transformer, random forest (RF), k-
nearest neighbors (kNN), and support vector regression (SVR)
models. Each model approximates the mapping y = M(x)
(Equation 1) with unique mathematical formulations and ar-
chitectures suited to specific challenges in circuit design. The
key parameters for these models are summarized in Table IV,
and their detailed descriptions are provided below.
1) Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP): MLP is a feedforward
neural network that approximates the mapping y = M(x)
by stacking multiple layers of linear transformations and non-
linear activation functions:
y = M(x) = W (L)z(L−1) + b(L),
z(l) = σ(W (l)z(l−1) + b(l)),
l = 1, . . . , L −1,
z(0) = x.
Here, W (l) and b(l) are the weight matrices and bias vectors
for layer l, z(l) is the activation at layer l, and σ represents
the non-linear activation function (e.g., ReLU). The depth and
flexibility of MLP allow it to approximate highly non-linear
relationships between x and y. MLP’s strength lies in its
ability to handle complex mappings, though it may be prone
to overfitting with small datasets.
2) Transformer: The Transformer [28] leverages a self-
attention mechanism to model complex dependencies between
components of the performance vector y. It implements M as:
y = M(x) = WoutFFN(MultiHead(xQ, xK, xV )),
where xQ, xK, and xV are the query, key, and value matrices
derived from x, and the multi-head attention mechanism is
defined as:
MultiHead(Q, K, V ) = Concat(head1, . . . , headh)W O,
with each attention head computed as:
headi = softmax
QiKT
Here, FFN represents the feedforward layers applied after the
attention mechanism [29]. The transformer’s ability to capture
both local and global dependencies in x makes it well-suited
for complex mappings.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

TABLE IV
MODELS AND THE CHOSEN PARAMETERS FOR EACH MODEL.
Model
Parameter
Description
Value
Transformer
dim_model
first fully connected layer dim
num_heads
heads in the multi-head attention models
dim_hidden
load resistor
dropout_p
the dropout probability
num_encoder_layers
number of layers in transformer encoder
activation
activation function of transformer encoder
relu
Multi Layer Perception (MLP)
num_layers
number of fully connected layers
dim_layers
dimension of layers
[200, 300, 500, 500, 300, 200]
Support Vector Regressor (SVR)
kernel
kernel type of the algorithm
multi_target_regression_type
type of combining multiple SVRs
MultiOutputRegression
k-Nearest Neighbors Regressor (KNN)
n_neighbors
number of neighbors
weights
weight function used in prediction
uniform
Random Forest Regressor (RF)
n_estimators
number of trees in the forest
criterion
function to measure the quality of a split
squared error (l2 Loss)
3) Random Forest Regressor (RF): Random Forest (RF)
approximates the mapping y = M(x) using an ensemble of
decision trees [30]:
y = M(x) = 1
Ti(x),
where Ti represents the output of the i-th decision tree trained
on random subsets of data, and N is the number of trees. RF
excels in modeling non-linear relationships with robustness to
noise and overfitting, making it practical for circuit design.
4) k-Nearest Neighbors Regressor (kNN): kNN imple-
ments M by averaging the parameters of the k closest samples
in the training set:
y = M(x) = 1
i∈Nk(x)
where Nk(x) denotes the indices of the k nearest neighbors
of x. This method captures localized mappings, though its
computational cost scales with the dataset size [31].
5) Support Vector Regressor (SVR): SVR solves a con-
strained optimization problem for each circuit parameter yj
to find a hyperplane that fits x to yj within a margin ϵ,
approximating yj as wT
j x+bj. Here, wj and bj are computed
by solving:
arg min
2∥w∥2 + C
max(0, |yj
i −(wT xi + b)| −ϵ),
where N is the number of training data points, w and b define
the hyperplane, and C controls the trade-off between margin
width and error tolerance [32]. Using kernel functions, SVR
maps x into a higher-dimensional space, enabling it to handle
non-linear mappings effectively [33]. These models collec-
tively address the challenges of mapping x to y, leveraging
their unique strengths to tackle diverse circuit complexities.
However, a key limitation of SVR is that, unlike other models
that jointly learn multiple outputs (multiple circuit parameters
in our case), SVR does not consider dependencies between
outputs, which can negatively impact accuracy.
B. Metrics
To evaluate the performance of our machine learning mod-
els, we adopt a two-step evaluation approach. First, we use
the predicted circuit parameters as inputs to the Cadence
simulation tool to obtain the corresponding performance met-
rics. These simulated performance values, denoted as ˆx, are
compared against the desired performance metrics x specified
in the dataset.
The primary evaluation metric is the relative error, which
quantifies the deviation between the predicted performance ˆxi
and the target performance xi:
ith Performance Error = |xi −ˆxi|
To assess the overall accuracy of the predicted parameters
for a given circuit, we compute the mean relative error across
all performance metrics as:
Mean Relative Error = 1
|xi −ˆxi|
where N is the total number of performance metrics.
This aggregated performance metric provides a single value
that summarizes the accuracy of each predicted parameter set.
a) Error Distribution Analysis: In addition to computing
the mean relative error, we analyze the distribution of errors by
plotting histograms of the relative errors for each model. These
histograms provide insights into the variability of prediction
accuracy and highlight the models’ tendencies to produce
outliers or consistently accurate predictions.
b) Comparison Metrics: To compare the performance of
models with each other and across different circuits, we report
the following key statistical metrics derived from the error
distributions:
• Mean and Standard Deviation: The mean relative error
and its standard deviation summarize the central tendency
and spread of errors, respectively.
• 75th Percentile (P75): This metric indicates the relative
error threshold below which 75% of all errors fall. A
lower P75 value reflects better overall performance.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

• 90th Percentile (P90): Similar to P75, P90 reflects the
threshold for 90% of errors, providing insights into the
upper error bounds.
• % of Errors Below Thresholds: We report the percent-
age of errors smaller than 2% and 5% to measure how
frequently models achieve high accuracy.
• Outlier Percentage (% > 20%): This metric highlights
the proportion of predictions with large errors (greater
than 20%), which is critical for identifying unreliable
predictions.
Each of these metrics captures different aspects of the
error distribution, allowing for a comprehensive comparison of
model performance. For example, the mean and P75 provide
insights into general accuracy, while the outlier percentage
highlights model robustness in avoiding large prediction errors.
C. Model Training and Simulation-Based Evaluation
Our codebase provides a seamless end-to-end model train-
ing and evaluation pipeline, as illustrated in Algorithm 1 and
2. This pipeline ensures smooth interaction between the ML
workflow and the simulation process, enabling accurate and
efficient evaluation of predicted circuit parameters.
During the training stage, we follow the standard ML
workflow. The input to the ML model consists of performance
specifications, and the target output is the corresponding circuit
parameters. The model is trained to minimize the ℓ1 loss,
which measures the distance between predicted and actual
circuit parameters.
Algorithm 1 End-to-End Model Training Pipeline
Require: Training dataset Dtrain = {(x, y)}, machine learn-
ing model M, maximum iterations maxIter, loss func-
tion L.
Ensure: Trained model M.
1: Initialize model parameters of M.
2: for t = 1 to maxIter do
Load data: Sample a mini-batch of b training pairs
{(xj, yj)}b
j=1 from Dtrain.
for each training pair (xj, yj) in the mini-batch do
Predict parameters: Use the current model to pre-
dict the circuit parameters:
ˆyj = M(xj).
Compute loss: Evaluate the loss between the pre-
dicted and ground truth circuit parameters:
Lossj = L(ˆyj, yj).
end for
Update model: Compute the gradient of the average
loss over the mini-batch:
Lbatch = 1
Lossj.
Perform a gradient update on the model parameters to
minimize Lbatch.
9: end for
10: Return the trained model M.
In the evaluation stage, we assess the performance of
the trained model using the evaluation dataset. For each
performance specification vector x, the trained model pre-
dicts the circuit parameters ˆy. These parameters are then
passed to the Cadence simulator to compute the corresponding
simulated performance metrics, denoted as ˆx. By comparing
the simulated performance ˆx with the desired performance
x, we compute the relative error for each performance. The
output of the evaluation stage includes relative error for each
performance specification, aggregated summaries (e.g., mean
relative error), and histograms of error distributions.
Algorithm 2 End-to-End Evaluation Pipeline
Require: Trained model M, evaluation dataset Deval = {x},
circuit simulator S, maximum iterations maxIter.
Ensure: Relative error list E.
1: Initialize relative error list E ←{}.
2: for t = 1 to maxIter do
Load data: Select input performance vector x =
{x1, x2, . . . , xN} ∈Deval.
Predict circuit parameters: Use the trained model M
to predict:
ˆy = M(x).
Simulate performance: Run the circuit simulator S to
generate simulated performance:
ˆx = S(ˆy) = {ˆx1, ˆx2, . . . , ˆxN}.
Compute errors: For each performance metric i =
1, . . . , N, compute the relative error:
ei = |xi −ˆxi|
Append {e1, e2, . . . , eN} to the error list E.
8: end for
9: Return relative error list E and compute aggregated
metrics (e.g., mean relative error, histograms).
A key feature of this pipeline is the inclusion of a Cadence
simulator in the evaluation phase. This allows us to accurately
obtain performance metrics under realistic circuit conditions,
including effects with inherent randomness, such as noise
figure in low-noise amplifiers (LNA). This advanced analysis
enables a more comprehensive evaluation compared to prior
works, which often overlook such nuances.
V. EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we evaluate ML models for predicting circuit
parameters from performance metrics, categorizing the circuits
into two groups: homogeneous circuits and heterogeneous
circuits. For each circuit, we analyze the accuracy and robust-
ness of the ML models by comparing their predictions against
simulation results and reporting evaluation metrics, including
relative error distributions, mean error, error percentiles, and
outlier percentages. This circuit-by-circuit analysis highlights
the strengths and limitations of ML models for different circuit
complexities and performance requirements.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

To account for the different numerical ranges of perfor-
mance metrics and circuit parameters, we normalize all data
to the range [−1, 1]. For each circuit, we randomly split the
dataset into 90% for training and 10% for testing. We train
the neural network models, including transformers and MLPs,
for 100 epochs using the Adam optimizer [34] with a learning
rate of 0.001. Each training process is repeated multiple times
with different random seeds to ensure the robustness of results.
A. Homogeneous Circuits
Common-Source Voltage Amplifier (CSVA). The results
for CSVA, presented in Table V and Figure 6, show that
the Transformer model outperforms other models with the
most accurate predictions and minimal error spread. The MLP
follows closely, delivering competitive performance with low
outlier rates. In contrast, traditional methods, RF, kNN, and
SVR, exhibit higher error distributions and less robustness, as
seen in their wider histograms and greater outlier percentages.
These results highlight the effectiveness of deep learning
models for predicting CSVA parameters.
Fig. 6. Relative error histogram of individual performance metrics and
mean relative error histogram for CSVA.
TABLE V
STATISTICAL SUMMARY OF MEAN RELATIVE ERROR FOR CSVA
Model
Mean
% Errors
< 2%
% Errors
< 5%
% Outlier
(> 20%)
5.96
7.54
6.46
12.27
19.8
60.2
Transformer
5.00
6.13
5.84
9.58
26.4
67.4
7.99
11.69
8.80
19.45
20.8
59.4
7.80
11.76
7.95
17.81
25.6
61.4
9.56
14.91
9.04
16.61
49.8
Cascode Voltage Amplifier (CVA). The results for CVA,
presented in Table VI and Figure 7, show that the Trans-
former model outperforms all others with the lowest mean
error, smallest spread, and the highest percentage of low-error
predictions. The MLP follows closely with competitive perfor-
mance and minimal outliers. In contrast, traditional methods
(RF, kNN, and SVR) display larger error distributions, with
SVR having the highest error spread and outlier rate. These
results confirm the superior accuracy and robustness of deep
learning models, for CVA parameter prediction.
Fig. 7. Relative error histogram of individual performance metrics and
mean relative error histogram for CVA.
TABLE VI
STATISTICAL SUMMARY OF MEAN RELATIVE ERROR FOR CVA
Model
Mean
% Errors
< 2%
% Errors
< 5%
% Outlier
(> 20%)
2.81
4.77
2.95
5.04
56.4
89.6
Transformer
2.34
3.74
2.08
3.29
72.6
93.4
4.24
9.03
3.92
8.10
59.4
78.8
4.61
8.24
4.24
12.59
57.0
77.8
8.44
15.30
6.82
15.22
19.6
67.0
Two-Stage Voltage Amplifier (TSVA). The results for
TSVA, shown in Table VII and Figure 8, reveal that RF
and kNN perform exceptionally well, achieving the highest
percentage of low-error predictions and the smallest outlier
rates. In particular, RF achieves the best overall accuracy
with concentrated error distributions and minimal spread. In
contrast, the Transformer and MLP exhibit higher mean
errors and larger spreads, indicating challenges in capturing
the parameter-performance mapping for TSVA. Among all
models, SVR shows the weakest performance with the highest
outlier rate and error spread. These results suggest that sim-
pler regression-based methods can outperform deep learning
approaches for circuits like TSVA.
Fig. 8. Relative error histogram of individual performance metrics and
mean relative error histogram for TSVA.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

TABLE VII
STATISTICAL SUMMARY OF MEAN RELATIVE ERROR FOR TSVA
Model
Mean
% Errors
< 2%
% Errors
< 5%
% Outlier
(> 20%)
8.66
19.26
5.47
21.46
43.6
74.2
11.0
Transformer
11.53
27.36
6.18
34.83
49.8
73.0
15.0
3.30
10.74
1.60
4.66
80.0
90.6
5.95
26.69
1.87
5.46
77.0
89.2
12.43
24.88
8.08
37.53
37.8
64.4
14.6
Low-Noise Amplifier (LNA). The results for LNA, shown
in Table VIII and Figure 9, demonstrate outstanding perfor-
mance across all models. Both the Transformer and MLP
achieve near-perfect accuracy, with all errors below 2% and
no outliers. Traditional methods (RF, kNN, and SVR) also
perform remarkably well, with minimal error distributions
and zero outliers. The mean relative errors and standard
deviations for all models are remarkably low, as seen in the
narrow and sharp error histograms. The results indicate that
LNA’s performance metrics are easier to predict accurately
compared to other circuits, likely due to its well-behaved
parameter-performance relationships. Overall, this highlights
the robustness and reliability of all evaluated models for LNA.
Fig. 9. Relative error histogram of individual performance metrics and
mean relative error histogram for LNA.
TABLE VIII
STATISTICAL SUMMARY OF MEAN RELATIVE ERROR FOR LNA
Model
Mean
% Errors
< 2%
% Errors
< 5%
% Outlier
(> 20%)
0.30
0.21
0.38
0.54
100.0
100.0
Transformer
0.40
0.24
0.51
0.70
100.0
100.0
0.61
0.43
0.77
1.19
98.2
100.0
0.53
0.34
0.65
0.91
99.4
100.0
0.81
0.59
1.03
1.49
94.8
100.0
Mixer. The Mixer results, presented in Table IX and Fig-
ure 10, show that all models achieve comparable performance
with minimal differences. The mean relative errors, as well
as the P75 and P90 values, remain close across all meth-
ods, indicating that the Mixer system is less challenging for
ML models to learn. While MLP and Transformer achieve
slightly lower mean errors and standard deviations, traditional
models such as kNN, RF, and SVR also perform consistently
with no significant outliers. The relative error histograms
further confirm that the predictions are tightly distributed
across all metrics. Overall, the results highlight that the Mixer
system is well-suited for ML-based parameter prediction, with
all models delivering strong and reliable performance.
Fig. 10. Relative error histogram of individual performance metrics and
mean relative error histogram for Mixer.
TABLE IX
STATISTICAL SUMMARY OF MEAN RELATIVE ERROR FOR MIXER
Model
Mean
% Errors
< 2%
% Errors
< 5%
% Outlier
(> 20%)
3.28
2.44
4.14
7.54
34.0
81.4
Transformer
3.22
2.53
4.04
8.25
37.0
81.2
3.30
2.45
4.03
8.01
33.8
81.2
3.27
2.46
4.09
7.91
34.2
81.2
3.30
2.45
4.19
7.74
34.4
81.2
Voltage-Controlled Oscillator (VCO). The results for
VCO, summarized in Table X and Figure 11, reveal com-
parable performance across all models. Traditional methods
such as RF and kNN deliver slightly better results, achieving
lower standard deviations and competitive error percentiles.
Notably, SVR achieves the lowest outlier rate, highlighting
its consistency despite relatively higher mean errors. Among
neural networks, the MLP and Transformer models provide
robust performance, with the Transformer achieving fewer
errors below 5% compared to MLP. However, the broader error
spread across all models indicates the complexity of accurately

--- PAGE BREAK ---

predicting VCO performance metrics, such as phase noise and
oscillation frequency. Overall, traditional methods exhibit a
slight edge for VCO, emphasizing their ability to handle this
circuit’s parameter-performance trade-offs effectively.
Fig. 11. Relative error histogram of individual performance metrics and
mean relative error histogram for VCO.
TABLE X
STATISTICAL SUMMARY OF MEAN RELATIVE ERROR FOR VCO
Model
Mean
% Errors
< 2%
% Errors
< 5%
% Outlier
(> 20%)
7.70
57.13
3.71
5.02
18.8
89.8
Transformer
7.62
60.10
3.52
4.85
30.2
90.6
6.95
52.06
3.43
5.24
30.6
89.4
7.11
52.99
3.41
4.75
30.2
91.8
7.42
58.73
3.62
5.09
26.8
89.4
Power Amplifier (PA). The results for PA, summarized
in Table XI and Figure 12, reveal significant challenges in
accurately predicting the performance metrics. MLP achieves
the lowest mean relative error and shows a relatively balanced
error distribution, making it the most consistent model for
PA among all tested approaches. The Transformer, while
demonstrating some promise, struggles with higher standard
deviations and a larger error spread. Traditional methods such
as RF and kNN exhibit inconsistent performance, with kNN
producing notable outliers and high P90 values. Notably, SVR
performs poorly, yielding large mean errors and the highest
outlier percentage, highlighting its inability to generalize well
for PA’s complex performance metrics.
The substantial error spread across all models indicates the
nonlinearity and intricate trade-offs inherent in PA design,
such as achieving high drain efficiency, PAE, and power gain
simultaneously. This complexity underscores the difficulty of
modeling PA behavior compared to other circuits.
Fig. 12. Relative error histogram of individual performance metrics and
mean relative error histogram for PA.
TABLE XI
STATISTICAL SUMMARY OF MEAN RELATIVE ERROR FOR PA
Model
Mean
% Errors
< 2%
% Errors
< 5%
% Outlier
(> 20%)
19.98
144.99
10.08
19.33
17.2
51.4
Transformer
22.39
203.36
10.63
21.37
38.2
11.6
66.27
316.86
42.11
96.97
47.4
37.70
98.20
29.23
63.31
43.8
140.85
987.05
64.30
137.62
67.6
B. Heterogeneous Circuits
Transmitter. The results for the Transmitter, shown in
Table XII and Figure 13, highlight challenges in predicting
performance metrics for complex systems. MLP achieves the
lowest mean relative error and consistent accuracy across
metrics. However, it shows slightly higher outlier errors com-
pared to kNN. The kNN demonstrates strong performance in
limiting large errors, achieving the lowest outlier percentage
and competitive results in error percentiles. In contrast, the
Transformer and RF models show increased error variabil-
ity, with higher error spreads. SVR struggles significantly,
exhibiting the largest mean error and the highest percentage of
outliers, emphasizing its limitations in handling the Transmit-
ter’s complexity. The results demonstrate that both MLP and
kNN are effective for this circuit type, with MLP excelling in
overall mean performance and kNN minimizing large errors.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Fig. 13. Relative error histogram of individual performance metrics and mean relative error histogram for Transmitter. The plots illustrate the relative error
distributions for system performance metrics, such as power consumption, along with block-specific metrics like phase noise for VCO.
Fig. 14. Relative error histogram of individual performance metrics and mean relative error histogram for Receiver. The plots depict the relative error
distributions for system-level performance metrics, such as power consumption, along with block-specific metrics like noise figure for the LNA.
TABLE XII
STATISTICAL SUMMARY OF MEAN RELATIVE ERROR FOR TRANSMITTER
Model
Mean
% Errors
< 2%
% Errors
< 5%
% Outlier
(> 20%)
4.02
38.51
2.51
5.36
67.80
88.65
2.10
Transformer
9.52
102.83
4.98
8.91
42.97
75.09
3.15
9.60
97.08
5.11
11.44
41.90
74.50
4.60
4.73
62.08
2.76
4.67
60.45
91.20
1.85
38.28
240.91
26.25
56.94
3.25
22.32
32.68
Receiver. The Receiver circuit achieves excellent prediction
accuracy across all models, as shown by the narrow distribu-
tions in the relative error histograms (Figure 14) and the statis-
tical summary in Table XIII. The kNN model demonstrates the
best overall performance, with the lowest mean error, smallest
standard deviation, and the highest percentage of predictions
under 2% and 5% errors. Furthermore, kNN produces no out-
lier predictions. RF also performs exceptionally well, closely
matching kNN, with similarly small mean and P75 errors.
MLP and Transformer models exhibit competitive results but
with slightly larger error spreads, indicating less consistency.
SVR, on the other hand, lags behind, showing higher mean
errors and more significant relative errors. Overall, the receiver
system results highlight the ability of kNN and RF to deliver
highly reliable predictions with minimal variability.
TABLE XIII
STATISTICAL SUMMARY OF MEAN RELATIVE ERROR FOR RECEIVER
Model
Mean
% Errors
< 2%
% Errors
< 5%
% Outlier
(> 20%)
0.75
2.15
0.68
1.03
97.35
98.90
0.15
Transformer
0.75
0.71
0.91
1.41
95.50
99.65
0.00
0.44
0.54
0.52
0.77
99.35
99.85
0.00
0.23
0.14
0.30
0.40
100.00
100.00
0.00
3.08
2.32
3.79
5.73
37.50
86.30
0.10
VI. DISCUSSION
The performance of ML models in predicting circuit param-
eters reflects a balance between circuit complexity and model
capability. Simpler circuits with linear parameter-performance
relationships tend to yield lower errors, whereas complex
circuits with non-linear interactions and intricate trade-offs
present greater challenges. Aligning model selection with the
unique characteristics of each circuit and understanding their
structural differences are crucial for achieving robust and
reliable design automation in analog and RF circuits.
The performance trends summarized in Table XIV high-
light the relationship between circuit complexity and model
accuracy. Among homogeneous circuits, more linear designs
like the LNA exhibit the lowest mean relative errors, at-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

TABLE XIV
SUMMARY OF BEST MODELS AND THE STATISTICS OF MEAN RELATIVE ERROR FOR EACH CIRCUIT
Circuit
Best Model
Mean
% Errors < 2%
% Errors < 5%
% Outlier > 20%
CSVA
Transformer
5.00
6.13
5.84
9.58
26.4
67.4
Transformer
2.34
3.74
2.08
3.29
72.6
93.4
TSVA
3.30
10.74
1.60
4.66
80.0
90.6
0.30
0.21
0.38
0.54
100.0
100.0
Mixer
Transformer
3.22
2.53
4.04
8.25
37.0
81.2
6.95
52.06
3.43
5.24
30.6
89.4
19.98
144.99
10.08
19.33
17.2
51.4
Transmitter
4.02
38.51
2.51
5.36
67.8
88.65
Receiver
0.23
0.14
0.30
0.40
100.0
100.0
TABLE XV
COMPARISON OF SCENARIOS AND MODELS
Scenario
Complexity
Data
Models
Homogeneous
Single M : RN →RD
Fewer samples
MLP, Transformer (best), RF
Heterogeneous
Coupled Mi’s; Larger N
More samples
MLP, kNN (best)
tributed to their straightforward physical structures and linear
parameter-performance relationships. For example, the LNA’s
linear amplification characteristics enable models like MLP to
accurately map performance metrics to parameters, achieving
near-perfect alignment with training goals.
Conversely, complex circuits like the PA and VCO exhibit
higher mean relative errors due to their intricate trade-offs and
non-linear behaviors. The PA’s challenges arise from its com-
plexity, with MLP emerging as the best model for its ability to
capture non-linear interactions, albeit with higher variability
indicated by a large standard deviation. For the VCO, the
RF model excels by handling non-linear relationships, which
proves effective despite the circuit’s expansive design space
and inherent randomness in metrics like phase noise.
These results highlight the importance of aligning model
capabilities with the physical and functional characteristics of
each circuit. The best-performing model is determined not only
by statistical accuracy but also by the design complexities and
non-linearities inherent in the circuit’s structure.
For heterogeneous circuits, the complexity increases due to
a larger number of parameters to predict and a corresponding
rise in the number of performance metrics. This expansion
results in a larger design space. To address this challenge and
maintain high prediction accuracy, we increase the number of
data points during dataset generation. The Receiver benefits
from kNN’s ability to efficiently handle its moderately linear
parameter space, made possible by the abundance of samples
distributed across different regions of the space. Similarly,
the Transmitter is best modeled by both MLP and kNN.
The MLP excels in managing multi-block complexities, while
kNN effectively captures the slight linearity introduced by the
extensive sampling of the parameter space.
To demonstrate the scalability of our approach, Figure 15
illustrates the mean relative error for the Transmitter and
Receiver as the size of the training dataset increases. As
shown, accuracy improves with more data points, emphasizing
the scalability of our methodology. Importantly, the dataset
(a) Transmitter
(b) Receiver
Fig. 15. Mean relative error histograms for (a) Transmitter using the MLP
model and (b) Receiver using the kNN model, evaluated across different
training dataset sizes. The plots illustrate the scalability of both models,
showing that increasing the training data leads to improved prediction
accuracy for their respective circuits.
was carefully designed to ensure an adequate number of
data points, achieving accuracy levels that are satisfactory for
practical purposes.
Building on the discussion of scalability, the analytical
formulation provides insight into the structural differences
between homogeneous and heterogeneous circuits, shedding
light on their respective data and modeling requirements.
A homogeneous circuit implements a single non-linear
mapping:
M : RN →RD,
x 7→y,
where x and y represent input and output vectors, respectively.
Under supervised learning, given samples (x, y) ∼P(x, y),
the training objective follows (2). Due to the single-stage
mapping and moderate dimensionality, fewer samples are
typically required for accurate predictions.
In contrast, a heterogeneous circuit consists of multiple
coupled mappings, for example, three sub-blocks with map-
pings M1, M2, M3, each defined as:
Mi : Rni →Rdi,
i = 1, 2, 3.
These mappings combine into a total mapping:
Mtotal(X) = f(M1(x1), M2(x2), M3(x3)),

--- PAGE BREAK ---

where X = [x1; x2; x3], with overall input dimensionality
N = P ni and output dimensionality D = P di. Although
the supervised learning objective remains as (2), the increased
complexity, non-linear interactions, and higher dimensionality
D require larger datasets and more expressive models to
achieve reliable predictions.
Table XV summarizes the model-centric comparison for
homogeneous and heterogeneous circuits. For homogeneous
circuits, the single-stage mapping M and moderate input
dimensionality N enable effective training with fewer data
samples. In contrast, for heterogeneous circuits, the multi-
stage structure, higher dimensionality N, and intricate interde-
pendencies necessitate larger datasets or more expressive non-
linear models to accurately capture the complex interactions.
VII. CONCLUSION
This work introduces an ML-based framework for pre-
dicting circuit parameters from performance specifications,
addressing both homogeneous and heterogeneous analog and
RF circuits. The study highlights the impact of model selection
on prediction accuracy and robustness, with Transformers and
MLPs demonstrating strong performance in capturing complex
relationships. Moreover, evaluation metrics, such as mean
relative error, effectively measured prediction accuracy, while
results emphasized the importance of aligning models with
circuit complexities and operational characteristics.
Future directions include extending the framework to incor-
porate layout optimization, integrating uncertainty quantifica-
tion for robust predictions, and exploring generative models to
generate diverse parameter sets that meet performance specifi-
cations. This research lays the groundwork for advancing ML-
driven circuit design, streamlining workflows, and addressing
the growing complexities of modern electronic systems.
REFERENCES
[1] W. Hong, Z. H. Jiang, C. Yu, D. Hou, H. Wang, C. Guo, Y. Hu, L. Kuai,
Y. Yu, Z. Jiang, Z. Chen, J. Chen, Z. Yu, J. Zhai, N. Zhang, L. Tian,
F. Wu, G. Yang, Z.-C. Hao, and J. Y. Zhou, “The role of millimeter-
wave technologies in 5g/6g wireless communications,” IEEE Journal of
Microwaves, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 101–122, 2021.
[2] S. H. Dokhanchi, B. S. Mysore, K. V. Mishra, and B. Ottersten,
“A mmwave automotive joint radar-communications system,” IEEE
Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems, vol. 55, no. 3, pp.
1241–1260, 2019.
[3] M. Alesheikh, R. Feghhi, F. M. Sabzevari, A. Karimov, M. Hossain, and
K. Rambabu, “Design of a high-power gaussian pulse transmitter for
sensing and imaging of buried objects,” IEEE Sensors Journal, vol. 22,
no. 1, pp. 279–287, 2022.
[4] P. Tseng, W. Yang, M. Wu, L. Jin, D. Li, E. Low, C. Hsiao, H. Lin,
K. Yang, S. Shen, C. Kuo, C. Heng, and G. Dehng, “A 55nm saw-
less nb-iot cmos transceiver in an rf-soc with phase coherent rx and
polar modulation tx,” in 2019 IEEE Radio Frequency Integrated Circuits
Symposium (RFIC), 2019, pp. 267–270.
[5] Y. Guo, Q. Liu, T. Li, N. Deng, Z. Wang, H. Jiang, and Y. Zheng,
“Cryogenic cmos rf circuits: A promising approach for large-scale
quantum computing,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems II:
Express Briefs, vol. 71, no. 3, pp. 1619–1625, 2024.
[6] R. Han and E. Afshari, “A cmos high-power broadband 260-ghz radiator
array for spectroscopy,” IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, vol. 48,
no. 12, pp. 3090–3104, 2013.
[7] R. R. Schaller, “Moore’s law: past, present and future,” IEEE spectrum,
vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 52–59, 1997.
[8] H. Bong, K. Cho, and Y. Seo, “Automation framework for digital
circuit design and verification,” in 2022 19th International SoC Design
Conference (ISOCC), 2022, pp. 263–264.
[9] V. Vassilev, D. Job, and J. Miller, “Towards the automatic design of
more efficient digital circuits,” in Proceedings. The Second NASA/DoD
Workshop on Evolvable Hardware, 2000, pp. 151–160.
[10] I. M. Elfadel, D. S. Boning, and X. Li, Machine learning in VLSI
computer-aided design.
Springer, 2019.
[11] G. Gielen and R. Rutenbar, “Computer-aided design of analog and
mixed-signal integrated circuits,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 88,
no. 12, pp. 1825–1854, 2000.
[12] P. E. Allen and D. R. Holberg, CMOS analog circuit design.
Elsevier,
2011.
[13] B. Razavi, RF Microelectronics, 2nd ed.
Prentice Hall Press, 2011.
[14] K. Hakhamaneshi, N. Werblun, P. Abbeel, and V. Stojanovi´c, “Bagnet:
Berkeley analog generator with layout optimizer boosted with deep
neural networks,” in 2019 IEEE/ACM International Conference on
Computer-Aided Design (ICCAD).
IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–8.
[15] K. Settaluri, A. Haj-Ali, Q. Huang, K. Hakhamaneshi, and B. Nikolic,
“Autockt: deep reinforcement learning of analog circuit designs,” in
Proceedings of the 23rd Conference on Design, Automation and Test
in Europe, ser. DATE ’20.
San Jose, CA, USA: EDA Consortium,
2020, p. 490–495.
[16] M. Fayazi, M. T. Taba, E. Afshari, and R. Dreslinski, “Angel: Fully-
automated analog circuit generator using a neural network assisted
semi-supervised learning approach,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and
Systems I: Regular Papers, 2023.
[17] H. Wang, K. Wang, J. Yang, L. Shen, N. Sun, H.-S. Lee, and S. Han,
“Gcn-rl circuit designer: Transferable transistor sizing with graph neural
networks and reinforcement learning,” in 2020 57th ACM/IEEE Design
Automation Conference (DAC).
IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–6.
[18] D. Krylov, P. Khajeh, J. Ouyang, T. Reeves, T. Liu, H. Ajmal, H. Aghasi,
and R. Fox, “Learning to design analog circuits to meet threshold
specifications,” in Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on
Machine Learning, ser. ICML’23.
JMLR.org, 2023.
[19] A. Mehradfar, X. Zhao, Y. Niu, S. Babakniya, M. Alesheikh, H. Aghasi,
and S. Avestimehr, “AICircuit: A Multi-Level Dataset and Benchmark
for AI-Driven Analog Integrated Circuit Design,” Machine Learning and
the Physical Sciences Workshop @ NeurIPS, 2024.
[20] S. A. Abdelaal, A. Hussein, and H. Mostafa, “A bayesian optimization
framework for analog circuits optimization,” in 2020 15th International
Conference on Computer Engineering and Systems (ICCES), 2020.
[21] S. Zhang, F. Yang, C. Yan, D. Zhou, and X. Zeng, “An efficient
batch-constrained bayesian optimization approach for analog circuit
synthesis via multiobjective acquisition ensemble,” IEEE Transactions
on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems, vol. 41,
no. 1, pp. 1–14, 2022.
[22] Z. Zhao and L. Zhang, “Deep reinforcement learning for analog circuit
sizing,” in 2020 IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems
(ISCAS), 2020.
[23] B. Razavi, Design of analog CMOS integrated circuits. New York, NY:
McGraw-Hill Education, 2017.
[24] A. Abidi, “Cmos wireless transceivers: the new wave,” IEEE Commu-
nications Magazine, vol. 37, no. 8, pp. 119–124, 1999.
[25] X. Liu, M. H. Maktoomi, M. Alesheikh, P. Heydari, and H. Aghasi,
“A 49-63 ghz phase-locked fmcw radar transceiver for high resolution
applications,” in ESSCIRC 2023- IEEE 49th European Solid State
Circuits Conference (ESSCIRC), 2023, pp. 509–512.
[26] X. Li and M. Ismail, Multi-Standard CMOS Wireless Receivers:
Analysis
Design.
Springer
2002.
[Online].
Available:
https://books.google.com/books?id=OkSi8gSf-4IC
[27] A. J. L. Martin, “Cadence design environment,” New Mexico State
University, Tutorial paper, vol. 35, 2002.
[28] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, and et al, “Attention is all you need,” Advances
in neural information processing systems, vol. 30, 2017.
[29] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “Bert: Pre-training
of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” 2019.
[30] L. Breiman, “Random forests,” Machine learning, vol. 45, pp. 5–32,
2001.
[31] O. Kramer, “K-nearest neighbors,” Dimensionality reduction with unsu-
pervised nearest neighbors, pp. 13–23, 2013.
[32] M. Awad, R. Khanna, M. Awad, and R. Khanna, “Support vector regres-
sion,” Efficient learning machines: Theories, concepts, and applications
for engineers and system designers, pp. 67–80, 2015.
[33] J.-P. Vert, K. Tsuda, and B. Sch¨olkopf, “2 a primer on kernel methods,”
Kernel Methods in Computational Biology, p. 35, 2004.
[34] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,”
2017.