Phasor-Pursuit Directional Modulation
David Couto Member, IEEE, Arash Samani Senior Member, IEEE, Alec Yonika
BAE Systems Inc., FAST Labs
Merrimack, NH 03054
Abstract—Emitting phased array RF systems have to contend
with an ever-increasing number of eavesdroppers as technolog-
ical advancements provide lower cost and/or more capable ra-
dios. Often, eavesdroppers can accumulate sufficient information
transmitted in sidelobes by integrating over long enough periods.
Directional modulation (DM) disrupts this capability by inducing
a randomized walk through IQ-space to reach a pertinent
location which corresponds to a symbol of particular amplitude
and phase. This results in higher secrecy capacity. The path taken
by the cumulative element contributions are determined by the
complex weights of individual transmitters. Because large phased
arrays support a large number of available paths, repetitions
of applied weights are not concerning. The same cannot be
said for arrays that consist of only a few elements, e.g. WiFi
routers. We introduce a computationally efficient and flexible
framework for DM that utilizes real-valued phase rotations of
element weights. It supports a wide family of modulation schemes
in phase and/or amplitude. By employing the state-of-the-practice
orthogonal noise injection framework, we demonstrate a richness
of unique paths which resolves concerns about repeated weights.
In our proposed scheme, there is a small reduction in received
power compared to traditional beamforming, as little as 1 dB,
which is an advantage over conventional directional modulation
which typically sacrifices 6 dB of power. Also, there is a
significantly larger set of possible element weights than that of the
conventional scheme. This feature protects against the possibility
of eavesdroppers breaking the distortion-based obfuscation of
symbols over repeated observations. From these two key benefits,
Phasor Pursuit Directional Modulation provides more secrecy
capacity than conventional directional modulation via increased
power delivery and increased receiver SNR and does so with
resilience to advanced eavesdropping threats.
Index Terms—Directional modulation (DM), physical-layer
security, secure wireless communication, keyless encryption.
I. INTRODUCTION
IELDED transmitting RF array systems require the means
to protect their transmissions from potential eavesdrop-
pers. One tactic is to protect the communication at the symbol
level, one example of a technology in this family of solutions
is directional modulation (DM). To provide security, DM
relies upon obfuscation of the symbols in power radiated
off-target, i.e. side lobes, if we consider the context of a
traditional uniform linear array. This is done by augmenting
transmitted signals at the element level such that the a-priori
secure communication direction is the only direction where the
waves combine with the intended phase and amplitude, which
makes eavesdropping infeasible [1]. Contrasting with standard
cryptographic approaches to protect transmitted content [2],
DM can be implemented at the physical layer [3], [4] for
information theoretic security [5]. DM has been described as
either a direct manipulation of the antenna radiating structures,
or a perturbation of the complex array element excitation
weights [6].
In many DM systems, the orthogonal vector approach
introduced in [1], [7] is employed. When we use this paradigm,
a DM implementation is a modification of array excitation
weights corresponding to a ±π/2 rotation; this is similar to
the artificial noise approach utilized by the information theory
community [8], [9]. These induced rotations are balanced,
such that the cumulative transmission arrives on-phase. This
results in a necessary trade of power placed on target by the
transmitting platform, e.g. half of the elements experiencing
a rotation leads to a roughly 6 dB loss, in exchange for the
increased security off-target. However, this presents a problem
that becomes apparent in the limit of few-element arrays. This
comes about from the limited set of unique combinations of
conventionally-transmitting and randomly-rotated nodes. For
a capable enough eavesdropper, the distorted symbols may be
recoverable as was demonstrated in [10].
A simple extension of the DM concept is presented in [11]
in which the random phase rotations induced by the array
excitation weights are chosen to be real-valued and small.
This technique induces the desired security aspects contained
in DM, while creating a larger set of unique combinations;
however, this approach induced some variability in the re-
ceived power at the target location. Other approaches utilize
genetic algorithms [4] or particle-swarming [12] methods to
perform the optimization task of selecting the array weights.
The use of these optimization approaches can be prohibitively
expensive in terms of computational cost, especially when the
transmitting system is expected to perturb array weights on a
per-symbol basis. In-between these two families of approaches
is where our work is placed; providing a computationally-
efficient means to randomly perturb the individual array
weights such that security off-target is increased yet providing
enough constraint so that the energy delivered on-target is
constant, or for amplitude modulation schemes, matching the
desired amplitude.
This paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we provide
the preliminary mathematical groundwork necessary for the
continued discussion and present the operational scenario that
guides the rest of our discussion. We then demonstrate the
functionality of a conventional DM framework. Section III
discusses the real-valued phase approach to DM, wherein we
also discuss modifications to further extend this capability
and provide broad operational relevance. Results that provide
direct comparison between conventional and real-valued phase
DM is discussed in Section IV with final statements following
979-8-3503-9214-2/24/$31.00 © 2024 IEEE
arXiv:2503.10459v1  [eess.SP]  13 Mar 2025

--- PAGE BREAK ---

in V.
II. BACKGROUND
Herein we present the salient mathematical features of DM
to aid in denoting the differing, noteworthy, behaviors between
conventional and real-valued phase approaches to DM. This
discussion is concluded with the operational scenario that is
used as the exemplar, and corresponding conventional DM
performance, which will be used as the operational scenario
for future discussions on the performance benefits and differ-
ences between conventional and real-valued phase DM unless
specified otherwise.
A. Mathematical Description
We assume isotropically-radiating antenna elements with
uniform array spacing of one half wavelength. The far-field
pattern, E(θ), is determined as a sum of the individual element
contributions with the respective element excitations αn,
E(θ) =
(αneiπ(n−N+1
)cos(θ)).
Implementing DM is achieved through replacing the individual
element excitations with the product of the modulated data
stream (at symbol level) and complex gain; the gain of which
possesses unity magnitude and non-zero phase in the IQ-space,
i.e. αn ≡dmG∗
n and Gn = ejϕn.
Moving from a single epoch to multiple epoch processing of
DM sequences introduces the requirement of constraining or-
thogonality across the gain differences over the array. Consider
two epochs, wherein the gain coefficients can be represented
via vectors ⃗Gu and ⃗Gv respectively. The gain difference is
simply, ∆⃗G = ⃗Gu −⃗Gv. Then, discretizing over the spatial
direction in Eq. 1, we denote the discrete channel matrix as

ei(1−N+1
)πcos(θ1)
. . .
ei(N−N+1
)πcos(θ1)
ei(1−N+1
)πcos(θ2)
. . .
ei(N−N+1
)πcos(θ2)
ei(1−N+1
)πcos(θK)
. . .
ei(N−N+1
)πcos(θK)

We then can denote the orthogonality constraint, as presented
in [7], as
H(θk = θtarget)∗∆⃗G = 0 .
We can now note the primary difference between conven-
tional and real-valued phase DM. Conventional DM systems,
such as those defined in [4], [6] constrain the phase of the
complex gain coefficient to three values ϕn = [−π/2, 0, π/2].
Whereas in the real-valued phase DM framework, we denote
ϕn as a random variable drawn from a beta distribution in the
interval ϕn ∈[−π/2, π/2], that is ϕn ∼π
2 [Be(α = β) −.5].
We present the coefficient determination algorithm in Algo-
rithm 1.
The implications of our modifications to the DM framework
are more readily assessed in the framework of vector synthesis
presented in [1], [7]. Wherein we examine the received symbol
as a superposition of vector contributions from the individual
emitters in IQ space; see Fig. 1 where we present a simple
case of conventional DM with an eight element ULA.
Fig. 1.
Illustrative example of a vector path obtained through an array
excitation approach consistent with conventional DM
Fig. 2. Vector path in IQ-space obtained through the real-valued phase DM
approach.
Here we observe that two of the eight emitters performed a
±π/2 rotation resulting in an approximate 2.5 dB loss. It is
an easy exercise to note the difficulty in finding unique paths
through IQ space which are induced by the cumulation of
orthogonal array contributions when the array has relatively
few elements. Within this problem space, we can easily
denote the benefit of the real-valued phase framework for
DM. In Fig. 2 we demonstrate the effect that the real-valued
phase rotations has on the vector path in IQ-space. It is
important to note the behavior of two vector contributions,
where an optimized close-out procedure is performed to reach
the appropriate symbol phase and amplitude. This result is
achieved through assessing the geometry of the vector path
and constructing and appropriate equilateral triangle with the
final element contributions, before a final scrambling operation
distributes the phases across the array.
B. Permutation
As we have alluded to, the motivation for including real-
valued phase rotations in the coefficient determination for
DM beamforming was to increase the configuration diversity.
This decreases the periodicity of repetition in DM transmis-
sions which decreases the likelihood of collecting enough
information by eavesdroppers to intercept the transmission
and effectively decode the DM. In the limit of large, dense,
phased arrays it may become too cumbersome to repeatedly
compute the individual phase rotations at the symbol rate. In
this situation it is important to note that permutations and
reflections about the symbol axis in IQ-space can be performed
for low-cost determination of additional sequences of gain
coefficients across the array. As an example, consider the case
Approved for Public Release; Distribution Unlimited
Not Export Controlled per: ES-FL-051324-0086

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Fig. 3.
Vector path of permuted gain sequences in the real-valued phase
approach to DM.
presented in Fig. 3 which shows a permuted case of vector
paths for DM utilizing the real-valued phase framework in
our exemplar presented herein.
C. Exemplar
For ease of analysis we consider a linear phased uniform
line array (ULA) with operational frequency of 1 GHz. The
phased array consists of N = 16 elements separated by
the conventional λ/2 spacing. Each element is capable of
transmitting with maximum, unity, gain and is steering the
main lobe response at 0◦from the array normal. We de-
fine eavesdroppers as receiving platforms located at angular
positions outside of the main lobe response. The scenario
embodies a dynamic scene with stationary transmitter and
receiver platform(s), i.e. symbol rate differences are implied
in the transmit scheme. Within each epoch the DM framework
must match a symbol corresponding to 0◦phase and amplitude
75% of total array power, that is an approximate 2.5 dB loss
in intended recipient direction when compared to conventional
beamforming techniques.
D. Conventional DM
We apply conventional DM to the exemplar presented above
and examine the performance of the transmitting platform
over a time-varying scenario. This allows us to examine the
variability that the DM paradigm is capable of introducing in
the radiation placed off-target. This is most readily observed in
the variance and average of the radiation pattern over several
epochs, each epoch presenting with the generation of a new
set of phase rotations.
We present the results for conventional DM in Fig. 4 over an
operational period comprising 200 independent transmission
epochs. The results demonstrate the ability of the conventional
DM framework to disrupt eavesdropper interception capability
by causing the received energy to be unreliable over time. This
effect is limited to directions that do not correspond to the
intended direction. As we would expect, the variance vanishes
as we approach the intended transmission direction which is a
consequence of the orthogonality constraint and implying no,
or limited, impact for the intentional link.
The results contained in Fig. 4 are bolstered by the ability
of conventional DM to provide epoch-to-epoch scrambling of
phase for the symbol location in the constellation. We provide
this for conventional DM in Fig. 5 where we observe a full π
of symbol phase variability at solid angles of approximately
11◦.
III. PERFORMANCE OF REAL-VALUED DM
With the results of the conventional DM approach in mind,
we now turn our attention to the results generated with the
real-valued phase DM framework. We restrict our analysis
to the same exemplar that we used for our discussion of
conventional DM. The beta distribution used for the real-
valued DM application was parameterized as α = β = 3. We
see directly in Fig. 6 that the real-valued phase DM framework
is capable of providing the same phenomena of variable energy
delivered in the side lobes. This comes at the cost of degree
of variability for the delivered energy when compared to the
result for conventional DM.
A. Convergence
As described in algorithm 1, we could rely upon repeated
pulls from the random number generator to arrive at an N −c
sized set of phases whose element weights’ sum comes within
Fig. 4. Time average (left) and variance (right) of radiation pattern for a 16 element ULA performing conventional DM over 200 epochs.
Approved for Public Release; Distribution Unlimited
Not Export Controlled per: ES-FL-051324-0086

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Fig. 5. Phase deviation in vertical transect through target location showing the mean and min/max deviation from the average.
Fig. 6. Time average (left) and variance (right) of radiation pattern for a 16 element ULA performing real-valued DM over 200 epochs.
c of the desired amplitude at zero phase. To guarantee that
the algorithm converges to the desired sum without repeated
pulls from the random number generator, we can inspect the
cumulative sum of the weights. When the euclidean distance
between the cumulative sum and symbol location drops below
the number of remaining elements to inspect, i.e. less than
c. When this occurs the remaining weights are replaced by
unit vectors pointing in IQ-space directly from the cumulative
sum to the destination. This can be thought of as allowing the
random walk vector to do as it will until it is sufficiently far off
the path to the destination that randomness is set temporarily
aside to herd the vector path towards our goal. When the
cumulative sum of the vector path is within c of the desired
amplitude at zero phase with just c weights remaining, the
final c weights are calculated instead of randomly chosen. The
c complex vectors form an equilateral triangle with the vector
from the tip of the vector path towards the target amplitude
serving as the base. We term the calculation of these c weights
as close out in the algorithm description, as seen in Fig. 7
Algorithm 1 Complex Gain Determination with Unit Ampli-
tude
ASSIGN PHASES: ϕn
ϕn ∼π
2 [Be(α = β > 1) −.5]
ASSIGN VALUES FOR CLOSEOUT
⃗Hco = PN−c
⃗Aoffset = ⃗A −⃗Hco
ϕoffset = −tan−1( Im( ⃗
Hco)
Re( ⃗
Hco) )
IF:|| ⃗Aoffset||2 < 2
⃗GN = 1
2 ⃗Aoffset + ˆAoffseteiπ/2
1 −( 1
2| ⃗Aoffset|)2
⃗GN−1 = ⃗Aoffset −⃗GN
ELSE IF:|| ⃗Aoffset||2 = 2
⃗GN = ⃗GN−1 = eiϕoffset
ELSE:
REDRAW
return {⃗Gn : n = 1, .., N}
Ultimately, the choice of PDF permits more than a scaled
and shifted symmetric Beta distribution; trades can be made
to lower the computational complexity of the random number
generator with other PDFs. The algorithm is generally agnostic
to this choice, so it can be taken as a design consideration. Of
course, there are limits in the ability to guarantee convergence
Approved for Public Release; Distribution Unlimited
Not Export Controlled per: ES-FL-051324-0086

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Fig. 7. Illustrative example of a vector path with a random weight replaced
with one calculated to head directly toward the target (green) and with the
final two weights forming an equilateral triangle (blue)
with the selection of the goal amplitude. A 16 element array
can only provide maximal directive field strength gain of
16x. Since DM requires some backoff from maximum gain
to provide space to dither the weights, the algorithm requires
some backoff as well. In the case of 16 elements, the target
amplitude probably shouldn’t be 15.99; although it is often
easily greater than approximately half, as is seen in many
traditional DM implementations.
B. Random Phase Distribution Functions
In the default configuration, Algorithm 1 draws from a
scaled and shifted version of a symmetric Beta distribution.
We prefer the symmetric Beta distributions to generate the
random phases for several reasons. Of course, as is built into its
name, is the symmetry about a peak such that the expectation
of the sum of the phases can be posed to reliably provide
zero after a simple shift of the distribution. The impact of
scaling makes it such that its range of support is confined to
the finite interval bordered by ±π/2. This is in comparison to
a uniform distribution which is similarly shifted and scaled,
wherein the bulk of its density is focused on values closer
to zero but exists on an open interval. When considering the
aforementioned guarantee of converging on one pull of a set
of phases, the emphasis on small phases makes it less likely
that the cumulative sum needs to be modified to herd the phase
toward the target amplitude with zero phase.
C. Amplitude Modulation with Constant Envelope Drivers
Regardless of the means, DM provides a capability to meet
quantized amplitude values through spatial incoherence in
directions not representing intended transmit locations. This
feature is necessary for arrays driven by amplifiers that require
unity peak to average power ratios. This can be used to meet
standard QAM schemes for arbitrary symbol constellations.
This capability is shown in Fig. 8 with a 4-ary amplitude
modulation scheme used as the example. For each amplitude
level, the target amplitude is adjusted so that the summation
of weights in the intended direction receives the appropriate
amplitude. This is not a unique feature of real-valued phase
DM as the number of ±π/2 weights in traditional DM could
also be varied to adjust the aggregate amplitude.
Fig. 8. Demonstration of achieving variable amplitude modulation schemes
through the use of vector paths induced by real valued phased DM.
D. Relaxing Unity Gain Constraint
Maintaining the constraint of constant, unity, magnitude
for the gain coefficients of the individual emitters allows
us to be flexible to a wider variety of platforms. However,
this constraint can be argued to be unnecessary for a large
range of scenarios; characterized by the capability of each
element, or individual transmitter, to emit with variable gain
magnitude within the interval 0 < Gn ≤1. This framework
has equivalent metrics in terms of unique paths through IQ-
space, represented in Fig. 9. The algorithm for determining
the complex gain coefficients is described in Algorithm 2.
Fig. 9. Vector path in IQ-space obtained through the real-valued phase DM
approach with each emitter capable of transmitting with variable amplitude
gain.
Algorithm 2 Complex Gain Determination with Variable
Amplitude
ASSIGN PHASES: ϕn
ϕn ∼π
2 [Be(α = β > 1) −.5]
ASSIGN VALUES FOR CLOSEOUT
⃗Hco = PN−c
⃗Aoffset = ⃗A −⃗Hco
ϕoffset = −tan−1( Im( ⃗
Hco)
Re( ⃗
Hco) )
⃗GN = || ⃗Aoffset||2
cos(ϕoffset) + isin(ϕoffset)
return {⃗Gn : n = 1, .., N}
Approved for Public Release; Distribution Unlimited
Not Export Controlled per: ES-FL-051324-0086

--- PAGE BREAK ---

IV. RESULTS
When we discuss the benefit of real-valued phase DM the
argument is centralized around two concepts, the uniqueness
of the sequence of complex gain coefficients and the benefit
of rich permutation sets of possible gain coefficients towards
increased secrecy capacity. Having discussed the algorithmic
differences in the two approaches we can then examine how
our proposed changes impact our performance by these quan-
tifiable measures.
A. Uniqueness of Gain Coefficients
Fig. 10. Uniqueness over time of orthogonal noise vector for the various DM
frameworks considered herein. Result shows the repetitions in conventional
DM weights from the initial epoch considered as reference through numerous
counts of unit value.
The modification of DM to include real-valued phase ro-
tations was done to increase the availability of unique vector
paths through IQ-space. Utilizing the orthogonal noise injec-
tion framework introduced by [1] we denote the possibility of
a false positive for orthogonality checks when the sequence
of gain coefficients is repeated from a prior epoch. This issue
is amplified with the use of arrays which consist of only
a few elements. This is due to the finite length of the set
of unique permutations for the gain coefficients of an array
with N elements and utilizing k/2 rotations of π/2 and
−π/2 each. The size of this set scales via permutations with
coupled choices, i.e. as
(N−k)!(k/2)!(k/2)!. By considering the
possibility of real-valued phase rotations for the complex gain
coefficients the length of our set of unique gain coefficients
is reinforced by the set of quantizable phase rotations that are
permissible by the bit-value of the appropriate precision. To
analyze this, we consider a scenario of an 8-element phased
array. Of the 8 elements in the original array, we permit
phase rotations in half; these phase rotations are equally split
among ±π/2 to guarantee no symbol distortion in the intended
direction. The set of permutations for this configuration is
then
4!2!2! = 420 which corresponds to the periodicity of a
particular DM configuration, or more succinctly how many
unique DM transmissions can occur with the given array. We
can observe this behavior by looking at the Manhattan distance
for real-valued phases, of a sequence of gain coefficients with
following permutations over the processing period. This is
shown for a simulated period of 10000 epochs. This allows
for adequate coverage of the period for conventional DM;
we present this result for conventional DM, real-valued phase
DM, and real-valued phase DM with variable amplitude in
Fig. 10. We see in this result that, over the period consid-
ered, conventional DM has two repetitions of the full initial
sequence of gain coefficients which can be seen in Fig. 10.
To be thorough and lend rigor to our analysis we also present
the case of permuted, conventional DM; wherein the complex
gain coefficients are methodically selected from the full set of
permutations as we discussed previously.
B. Secrecy Capacity
Metrics that are useful for assessing the performance of
DM systems are discussed in [13], among them is the notion
of secrecy capacity [14]–[17] which is widely used in the
information theory community as a measure of the maximum
amount of information that a receiver can reliably recover from
a transmission that remain unrecoverable by an eavesdropper.
This is denoted as the difference in link capacity between the
legitimate listener and eavesdropper, Cs = (Cr −Ce)+. As
the eavesdroppers capacity decreases, unintended listeners lose
the ability to decode transmissions intended for the legitimate
user. Herein we use the term secrecy capacity for what is
truly secrecy spectral efficiency, the ratio of secrecy capacity
to bandwidth, with units of bits/second/Hz. Starting from the
formulation of the radiation pattern described in Eqn. 1 we can
denote the received signal at angular location θ for a discrete
time index m as,
y(θ, m) = hm(θ)x(m) + η = E(θ, m) + η .
Where η is the complex, zero-mean Gaussian noise present
in the channel and we have introduced the complex fading
coefficients hm(θ) and modulated data stream x(m). The
instantaneous received SNR at an angular location θK for a
receiver operating with noise power N(θ) is then,
γm(θK) = ||E(θK, m)||2
N(θ)
Averaging the SNR over a processing window allows us to
introduce manipulations on the time-wise variance of the radi-
ation pattern. Denoting the expectation and variance operators
as E
and V
respectively and the time-averaged noise
power as ¯N(θ), we obtain simply
γm(θ)
||E(θK, m)||2
¯N(θ)
Noting the definition of the variance of a distribution,
V[x] ≡E[x2] −E[x]2.
Which allows us to rephrase the time-averaged SNR in
terms of the qualitative results demonstrated in Figs. 4 and 6
γm(θ)
E(θ)
E(θ)
/ ¯N(θ) .
Approved for Public Release; Distribution Unlimited
Not Export Controlled per: ES-FL-051324-0086

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Fig. 11.
Secrecy spectral efficiency for conventional (left), real-valued phase with unit amplitude (middle), and real-valued phase with variable amplitude
(right) DM for an 8-element ULA with 4 randomized phase rotations in the absence of noise and over 500 epochs.
Then, as is discussed in [16] and [10], we can denote
the spatial distribution of the achievable secrecy rate through
utilizing the time-averaged SNR,
R(θ) = log2
1 + E
γm(θ)
With the total secrecy capacity of the transmission denoted as
the diferrence in secrecy rate between the intended direction
θr and the arbitrary location of a eavesdropper θe, i.e.
Cs = R(θr) −R(θe)
= log2
 ¯N(θe)
¯N(θr)
 ¯N(θr) + V
E(θr)
E(θr)
¯N(θe) + V
E(θe)
E(θe)
(10)
The comparison of the secrecy capacity of the two DM
frameworks discussed herein are presented in Fig. 11 in a
scenario with 0 dB SNR over a 500 epoch processing window.
We can see that the real-valued phase approach to DM with
variable gain drastically improves the secrecy capacity of the
transmission. This secrecy capacity estimate in Fig. 11 is only
based by changes in SNR as a matter of beamforming; note
the similarity with Fig. 4. Secrecy capacity is further improved
when
¯N(θr) increases due to the noise-like distortion of
directional modulation.
V. CONCLUSION
We have presented the underlying framework for performing
directional modulation (DM) on phased arrays by considering
the process as that of selecting the complex weight coefficients
leading to a constrained, randomized, walk of vector path ac-
cumulations through IQ-space. We showed that in conventional
DM frameworks, where the modifying weight coefficients are
limited to ±π/2, selecting unique permutations of the se-
quence of gain coefficients becomes difficult when the number
of elements in the phased array shrinks. This is remedied
through our approach by expanding the array excitations to
include coefficients which correspond to real-valued phase
rotations. Wherein our uniqueness is bolstered by our fidelity
in quantizing the appropriate real number presenting the phase.
This approach was shown to possess the relevant properties,
in terms of uniqueness, while also providing the same benefits
that are expected with DM. Namely, variability in the intensity
of the radiation pattern through scrambling of the side lobes
while preserving energy and symbol characteristics in the
direction of the intended receiver. Networks of eavesdroppers
with adequate spatial diversity who might attempt to decode
transmitted messages are mitigated by distorting every symbol
in a unique manner. Through this mechanism, a small amount
of open communications security capacity is traded for vastly
increased secrecy capacity against advanced threats.
REFERENCES
[1] Y. Ding and V. F. Fusco, ”A Vector Approach for the Analysis and
Synthesis of Directional Modulation Transmitters,” in IEEE Transactions
on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 361-370, Jan. 2014,
doi: 10.1109/TAP.2013.2287001.
[2] W. Stallings, ”Cryptography and Network Security.” 4th ed. Pearson
Education, India 2006.
[3] M. P. Daly and J. T. Bernhard, “Beamsteering in pattern reconfigurable
arrays using directional modulation,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol.
58, no. 7, pp. 2259- 2265, Jul., 2010.
[4] M. P. Daly, E. L. Daly, and J. T. Bernhard, “Demonstration of directional
modulation using a phased array,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol.
58, no. 5, pp. 1545-1550, May, 2010.
[5] M. Bloch and J. Barros, ”Physical-Layer Security: From Information
Theory to Security Engineering,” Cambridge University Press, 2011.
[6] Y. Ding and V. F. Fusco, ”A review of directional modulation technology”.
International Journal of Microwave and Wireless Technologies, 8(7), 981-
993, 2016. doi:10.1017/S1759078715001099
[7] Y. Ding and V. F. Fusco, ”Orthogonal Vector Approach for Synthesis
of Multi-Beam Directional Modulation Transmitters,” in IEEE Antennas
and Wireless Propagation Letters, vol. 14, pp. 1330-1333, 2015, doi:
10.1109/LAWP.2015.2404818.
[8] R. Negi and S. Goel, ”Secret Communication Using Artificial Noise,” in
Proc. IEEE Veh. Technol. Conf., Sept. 25-28 2005, vol. 62, no. 3, pp.
1906-1910.
[9] S. Goel and R. Negi, ”Guaranteeing Secrecy Using Artifical Noise,” IEEE
Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 2180-2189, Jun., 2008.
[10] M. Hafez, T. Khattab, T. Elfouly and H. Arslan, ”Secure multiple-
users transmission using multi-path directional modulation,” 2016 IEEE
International Conference on Communications (ICC), Kuala Lumpur,
Malaysia, 2016, pp. 1-5, doi: 10.1109/ICC.2016.7511289.
[11] X. Fan, Z. Zhang, W. Trappe, Y. Zhang, R. Howard and Z. Han, ”Secret-
Focus: A Practical Physical Layer Secret Communication System by Per-
turbing Focused Phases in Distributed Beamforming,” IEEE INFOCOM
2018 - IEEE Conference on Computer Communications, Honolulu, HI,
USA, 2018, pp. 1781-1789, doi: 10.1109/INFOCOM.2018.8486339.
[12] Y. Ding and V. F. Fusco, ”Directional modulation transmitter synthesis
using particle swarm optimization,” 2013 Loughborough Antennas &
Propagation Conference (LAPC), Loughborough, UK, 2013, pp. 500-503,
doi: 10.1109/LAPC.2013.6711950.
[13] Y. Ding and V. F. Fusco, ”Establishing Metrics for Assessing the Perfor-
mance of Directional Modulation Transmitters,” 2014 IEEE Transactions
on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 62, pp. 2745-2755
[14] C.E. Shannon, “Communication theory of secrecy systems,” The Bell
Labs Technical Journal, vol. 28, pp 656-715, 1949 doi:10.1002/j.1538-
7305.1949.tb00928.x.
Approved for Public Release; Distribution Unlimited
Not Export Controlled per: ES-FL-051324-0086

--- PAGE BREAK ---

[15] A.D. Wyner, “The wire-tap channel,” in The Bell Labs Technical
Journal, vol. 54, no. 8, pp. 1355-1387, 1975 doi: 10.1002/j.1538-
7305.1975.tb02040
[16] J. Barros and M. R. D. Rodrigues, ”Secrecy Capacity of Wireless
Channels,” 2006 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory,
Seattle, WA, 2006, pp. 356-360 doi: 10.1109/ISIT.2006.261613.
[17] I. Csiszar and J. Korner, ”Broadcast Channels with Confidential Mes-
sages,” 1978 IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 24, pp. 339-
348.
Approved for Public Release; Distribution Unlimited
Not Export Controlled per: ES-FL-051324-0086