2.4-GHz Integrated CMOS Low-Noise Amplifier
(English Version*)
Jorge L. Gonz´alez-Rios, Juan C. Cruz Hurtado, Robson L. Moreno, Diego V´azquez
Abstract—This paper presents the analysis, design, fabrication,
and measurement of an integrated low-noise amplifier (LNA)
implemented using a 130 nm CMOS technology, operating in
the 2.4 GHz band. The LNA is a crucial component in the
performance of receivers, particularly in integrated receivers.
The proposed LNA was designed to meet the specifications of the
IEEE 802.15.4 standard. Post-layout simulation results, including
pads with electrostatic discharge (ESD) protection, are as follows:
gain of 10.7 dB, noise figure of 2.7 dB, third-order input intercept
point (IIP3) of 0.9 dBm, input and output impedance matching
better than -20 dB with respect to 50 Ωterminations, with a
power consumption of 505 µW powered from a 1.2 V supply. The
obtained results fall within the range of those recently reported
for the same topology and operating frequency. The measured
scattering parameters (S-parameters) are consistent with the
simulation results. This work contributes to the development of
a new research line in Cuba on the design of radio-frequency
(RF) integrated circuits.
Index Terms—Low-noise amplifier (LNA), CMOS, integrated
circuit, low power, radio frequency.
I. INTRODUCTION
Short-range wireless communication devices are increas-
ingly offering a higher number of applications, which pose
design challenges such as miniaturization, low-voltage opera-
tion, and reduced energy consumption. These demands can be
satisfied using current CMOS technologies, which allow the
integration of all system blocks, including RF circuits, into a
single chip [1], [2].
Data transfer in these applications requires receivers with a
wide dynamic range due to the variability of RF signal levels
and the presence of multiple interferers [3]. Therefore, mul-
tiple design trade-offs arise when implementing the different
RF front-end blocks [4], especially in the low-noise amplifier
(LNA), which is the first active block of the receiver.
The LNA determines the minimum detectable signal of the
receiver, through a sufficiently high gain and a low noise
figure [4], [5]. On the other hand, too high a gain can saturate
subsequent blocks (such as the mixer) in the presence of strong
input signals. Simultaneously, the LNA must also provide good
input impedance matching, sufficiently high linearity, and good
reverse isolation.
This work presents an approach to the analysis, design,
fabrication, and experimental characterization of a CMOS
*This document is the author’s translation of a peer-reviewed paper pub-
lished initially in Spanish. How to cite: J. L. Gonz´alez, J. C. Cruz, R. L.
Moreno, and D. V´azquez, “2.4-GHz Integrated CMOS Low-Noise Amplifier,”
in V International Symposium on Electronics, XVI Convention Informatica
2016, La Habana, Cuba, 14-18 Mar, 2016.
Fig. 1. Common-source LNA topology with inductive degeneration.
LNA with common-source topology and inductive degener-
ation (Figure 1). This topology is widely used in integrated
CMOS receivers for short-range communications [5]–[7]. The
design was implemented to meet the specifications of the IEEE
802.15.4 standard [7] at 2.4 GHz, and fabricated in a 130
nm, 1.2 V CMOS technology. This work contributes to the
development of a new research line in Cuba on the design of
RF integrated circuits [8], [9].
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II
describes the chosen topology and the general design method-
ology. Section III presents a simplified circuit analysis, provid-
ing elements for selecting the passive components. Section IV
presents the simulation results used for design, the measured
scattering parameters, and considerations for physical imple-
mentation, as well as experimental results. Finally, Section V
provides conclusions and outlines future work.
II. COMMON-SOURCE CMOS LNA TOPOLOGY WITH
INDUCTIVE DEGENERATION
The basic schematic of a common-source LNA (CS-LNA)
with inductive degeneration is shown in Figure 1. The induc-
tive degeneration (via Ls) produces the resistive component
required to match the input impedance to the preceding stage
without introducing additional noise [10]. The capacitor CX
helps minimize the noise figure for specific gain and power-
consumption targets [11]. The gate inductor Lg is included to
tune the input impedance. Transistor M2 is used as a cascode
arXiv:2509.02224v1  [eess.SY]  2 Sep 2025

--- PAGE BREAK ---

stage to reduce the Miller effect on M1 and to improve reverse
isolation [5]. The drain inductor LD forms a parallel resonant
network with the output capacitances of the cascode stage and
the impedance seen toward the load. The capacitive divider
(C1, CP ) is included to couple the output impedance to 50 Ω
for stand-alone LNA characterization. Finally, Cb blocks the
DC component from the RF source.
Transistor sizing can be used to minimize the noise figure
(NF), as demonstrated in prior work on this topology [11]–
[13]. High IIP3 with low power consumption can be achieved
by exploiting the linearity “sweet spot” in MOS transistors
biased in moderate inversion [14]. This IIP3 peak occurs at
approximately the same current density [15], [16], so linearity
can also be maximized through proper transistor sizing.
Guided by the above considerations and the need to min-
imize power consumption, the design-space exploration con-
sisted in sweeping the bias current (ID) and the transistor
width. For each pair (ID, W), the passive-element dimensions
were synthesized to meet the gain and impedance-matching
requirements (LNA synthesis) while respecting the technology
limits so that all candidate circuits were physically realizable.
Once the passive elements were fixed, the NF and IIP3 of
each synthesized LNA were obtained. The set of results for the
different LNAs constitutes a design space from which the final
implementation can be selected, balancing the criteria chosen
by the designer (in addition to power, noise, and linearity,
other aspects such as occupied area and robustness to process
variations may be considered), balancing the criteria chosen
by the designer (in addition to power, noise, and linearity,
other aspects such as occupied area and robustness to process
variations may be considered).
III. CIRCUIT ANALYSIS
The available power gain of the LNA can be expressed as
G ≜Po
Pavs
= I2
o/(4 G′
s /(4 RS) = G2
m RS
where Gm ≜|Io/Vs| is the effective transconductance of
the input stage under input matching, RS is the source
resistance, and G′
o ≡ℜ{Y ′
o} is the real part of the output-
stage admittance seen by the load.
The output conductance is the parallel combination of
the cascode output conductance and the drain-inductor loss,
namely
o = ℜ{Yod} +
ω0LDQD
where ω0 is the operating angular frequency and QD is the
quality factor of LD.
Using a simplified small-signal model for the input stage
(considering in M1 only Cgs and the controlled source io =
gmvgs, and treating LS, Lg, and CX as ideal), the effective
transconductance under input matching can be approximated
Gm ≃
2 ω0 LS
Fig. 2. Dependencies of passive elements in the transconductance stage on
LNA gain, transistor dimensions, and biasing.
TABLE I
LNA SPECIFICATIONS
Frecuency
(GHz)
Gain
(dB)
(dB)
IIP3
(dBm)
S11, S22
(dB)
2.4 – 2.5
10.5±0.5
<-10
Equations (1)–(3) show that the LNA gain exhibits a trade-
off between the characteristics of the drain inductor LD and
the source-degeneration inductor LS: the former contributes
through the product LDQD (via G′
o), and the latter domi-
nates through its inductance. In selecting LD, the frequency
response of the output impedance must also be considered. To
widen the frequency span over which the output impedance
remains adequate, the quality factor of the output resonant
network should be reduced; thus, a lower QD is desired.
To maintain the same contribution of the output network
to the gain when decreasing QD, LD must be increased
proportionally. However, the maximum achievable inductance
is limited by both the technological constraints of on-chip
inductors and the minimum capacitance in the output resonant
network.
Due to these trade-offs in selecting the drain inductor, it is
convenient to fix the characteristics of LD first and then de-
termine the remaining passive elements. The simplified small-
signal equations are not accurate enough to directly compute
final design values, but they provide a logical sequence for
calculating the input-stage passive elements. This sequence is
summarized in a flow chart in Figure 2, which also includes
the dependencies on device sizing and biasing. The total
equivalent capacitance between the gate and source of M1
is given by CT = CX + Cgs.
IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A. Design Space Exploration
Simulations were performed using the device models pro-
vided by a 130 nm CMOS Process Design Kit (PDK) follow-
ing the RF specifications in Table I for ZigBee/IEEE 802.15.4
receivers [17], [18]. Input (S11) and output (S22) reflection
coefficients are referenced to 50 Ω.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Fig. 3. Simulation results at 2.45 GHz for NF (top) and IIP3 (bottom) versus
transistor W1 and bias current.
As described in Section II, the exploration consisted of
sweeping the bias current (ID) and the width of transistor M1
(W1). The width of M2 was set to W2 = W1/2 to reduce its
contribution to the load capacitance and increase the selection
margin of the output matching network [6]. The channel length
of all transistors was fixed to the minimum allowed by the
technology (L1 = L2 = L = 0.12 µm). The supply voltage
was VDD = 1.2 V.
Figure 3 shows simulation results at 2.45 GHz for the
noise figure (NF) and the input-referred third-order intercept
point (IIP3) as a function of W1 and ID. All results shown
correspond to circuits with S11, S22 < −15 dB and gains in
the interval [10.3, 10.9] dB. The minimum values of W1 for
ID = 0.4 mA (24 µm) and ID = 0.3 mA (32 µm) were
limited by the technology constraints on the passive elements
required to meet the gain and matching specifications. All
synthesized LNAs meet the NF specification (NF < 3 dB).
However, the required linearity (IIP3 > −4 dBm) is not met
for ID = 0.3 mA, so this bias current must be discarded. Based
on these results, we selected the LNA with ID = 0.4 mA
(the lowest current for which all requirements are met) and
W1 = 40 µm, achieving the highest IIP3 at that power level.
B. Fabrication and Experimental Results
Figure 4 illustrates the schematic of the fabricated LNA.
The gate of M1 is biased using a current mirror (MB) excited
externally with a reference current IREF. All pads are protected
against electrostatic discharge (ESD) by diodes [6] (not shown
in the figure). Decoupling capacitors were included between
the bias/supply terminals (BIAS and VDD) and ground (GND)
to reduce RF coupling into DC lines. Table II lists the main
device dimensions and component values used (with VDD =
1.2 V).
A microphotograph of the fabricated LNA is shown in Fig-
ure 5. In the implemented layout, the inductors were placed as
far apart as possible from each other and from the RF and bias
signal traces within the available chip area to minimize elec-
tromagnetic coupling, which can affect circuit performance.
Fig. 4. Schematic of the fabricated LNA.
TABLE II
IMPLEMENTED LNA DIMENSIONS
IREF
W1/L1
W2/L2
WB/LB
(µA)
(µm/µm)
(µm/µm)
(µm/µm)
(kΩ)
(pF)
31.5
40/0.12
20/0.12
4/0.12
12.6
(nH)
(fF)
(nH)
(nH)
(fF)
(pF)
13.5
1.24
TABLE III
POST-LAYOUT SIMULATION RESULTS
IIP3
(mA)
(µW)
(dB)
(dB)
(dBm)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
0.42
10.7
The free area between pads and between the gate inductor
and the bias lines was used to implement large decoupling
capacitors (e.g., CDD = 747 pF and CBIAS = 427 pF). In
the implemented layout, the inductors were placed as far apart
as possible from each other and from the RF and bias signal
traces within the available chip area to reduce electromagnetic
coupling, which affects the circuit performance [19], [20]. The
free area between pads and between the gate inductor and the
bias lines was used to implement large decoupling capacitors
(e.g., CDD = 747 pF and CBIAS = 427 pF). The chip area
is 1230 × 1240 µm2, including pads.
Post-layout simulation results (i.e., including parasitic ex-
traction of resistive and capacitive effects) are summarized
in Table III for the center frequency of interest (2.45 GHz).
The total supply current is IDD = IREF + ID, and PDC =
IDDVDD. The table demonstrates compliance with all speci-
fications, with power dissipation and RF metrics aligning with
the state of the art [21].
Measurements were performed directly on-chip using a
Cascade® microprobe station (Figure 6). S-parameters were
measured with an HP® 8510C network analyzer. To forward-
bias the ESD protection diodes, a DC component of ap-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Fig. 5. Microphotograph of the fabricated LNA.
Fig. 6. LNA measurement setup.
proximately 0.6 V was superimposed at the RF terminals
by the analyzer itself. The minimum available RF excitation
level in this analyzer is −13 dBm [22], which exceeds the
maximum input level for which the LNA was designed and
lies outside its linear range. This causes differences between
the measurements and the S-parameter behavior under nominal
IEEE 802.15.4 operating conditions.
Figure 7 shows the frequency response of the S-parameters,
comparing experimental results with post-layout simulations.
For a more realistic comparison, post-layout simulations were
performed at the same excitation used during measurement
(−13 dBm). Since small-signal S-parameter simulations lin-
earize the circuit around the operating point, they do not cap-
ture effects arising when the LNA is driven outside its linear
range. Therefore, a large-signal simulation was employed to
obtain S-parameters under nonlinear conditions (LSSP, Large-
Fig. 7.
Frequency response of S-parameters: experimental vs. post-layout
simulations.
Signal Scattering Parameters [23]).
Large-signal simulations confirm how the −13 dBm exci-
tation alters the measured results, except for input matching
(S11). It is therefore reasonable to expect improved values
for the other S-parameters when the LNA is driven with ap-
propriate input levels: increased gain (S21), improved reverse
isolation (S12), and reduced frequency shift in output matching
(S22). Although the measured input matching degrades with
respect to simulation, it remains better than-10 dB across
the band, thus meeting the specification. The gain response
exhibits a steeper roll-off above the center frequency, suggest-
ing parasitic capacitances higher than modeled; however, the
gain at 2.45 GHz is only 0.5 dB lower than the simulated
value at −13 dBm. Assuming a similar difference when the
circuit operates with input levels below −20 dBm, the gain
is expected to remain above 10 dB under normal operating
conditions (the simulated gain at −45 dBm is 10.7 dB).
For the output matching, a shift toward lower frequencies
is observed, which may be associated with process variations
[24]. The appearance of similar behavior in other published
works—either at the same frequency with a different technol-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ogy [21] or at higher frequencies with a similar technology
[20]—suggests a non-random common cause. Thus, this de-
viation may also be due to parasitic capacitances larger than
modeled (consistent with the gain behavior) and/or magnetic
coupling among inductors [20]. Reverse isolation likewise
degrades with respect to simulations; this has been shown
to occur primarily due to magnetic coupling between the
drain, source, and gate inductors [19], [20]. Nevertheless, the
measured value remains acceptable, and the LNA satisfies the
usual stability criterion (e.g., K > 1 and ∆< 1 [25]).
V. CONCLUSIONS
This work presented the analysis, design, and measurement
of a CMOS common-source LNA with inductive degeneration,
contributing to RF IC research in Cuba. Designed for IEEE
802.15.4 at 2.4 GHz in 130 nm CMOS, post-layout simulations
show 10.7 dB gain, 2.7 dB NF, 0.9 dBm IIP3, S11 and S22
better than -20 dB, and 505 µW consumption. Measurements
confirmed simulations within expected deviations. The results
and discussions presented can be used in future implemen-
tations to improve experimental performance in the desired
frequency band.
REFERENCES
[1] V. Vidojkovic et al., Adaptive Multi-Standard RF Front-Ends. Springer,
2008.
[2] M. Schneider and C. Galup-Montoro, CMOS Analog Design Using All-
Region MOSFET Modeling.
Cambridge University Press, 2010.
[3] L. Tang et al., “Channel Characterization and Link Quality Assessment
of IEEE 802.15.4-Compliant Radio for Factory Environments,” IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 99–110, 2007.
[4] B. Razavi, RF Microelectronics.
Prentice Hall, 1998.
[5] T. Lee, The Design of CMOS Radio-Frequency Integrated Circuits,
2nd ed.
Cambridge University Press, 2004.
[6] P. Leroux and M. Steyaert, LNA-ESD Co-Design for Fully Integrated
CMOS Wireless Receivers, ser. The Kluwer International Series in
Engineering and Computer Science.
Springer, 2005.
[7] S. Farahani, ZigBee Wireless Networks and Transceivers.
Elsevier,
2008.
[8] J. L. Gonz´alez, J. C. Cruz, R. L. Moreno, and D. V´azquez, “A Proposal
for Yield Improvement with Power Tradeoffs in CMOS LNAs,” IEEE
Latin America Transactions, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 13–19, 2016.
[9] J. L. Gonz´alez, R. L. Moreno, J. C. Cruz, and D. V´azquez, “Energy-
aware low-power CMOS LNA with process-variations management,”
Active and Passive Electronic Components, vol. 2016, 2016. [Online].
Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1155/2016/8351406
[10] A. Karanicolas, “A 2.7-V 900-MHz CMOS LNA and Mixer,” IEEE
Journal of Solid-State Circuits, vol. 31, no. 12, pp. 1939–1944, 1996.
[11] P. Andreani and H. Sjoland, “Noise Optimization of an Inductively
Degenerated CMOS Low Noise Amplifier,” IEEE Transactions on
Circuits and Systems II: Analog and Digital Signal Processing, vol. 48,
no. 9, pp. 835–841, 2001.
[12] D. Shaeffer and T. Lee, “A 1.5-V, 1.5-GHz CMOS Low Noise Ampli-
fier,” IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 745–759,
1997.
[13] L. Belostotski and J. Haslett, “Noise Figure Optimization of Inductively
Degenerated CMOS LNAs with Integrated Gate Inductors,” IEEE Trans-
actions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers, vol. 53, no. 7, pp.
1409–1422, 2006.
[14] V. Aparin, G. Brown, and L. Larson, “Linearization of CMOS LNA’s
via Optimum Gate Biasing,” in Proceedings of the IEEE International
Symposium on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS), 2004.
[15] G. Niu et al., “Intermodulation Linearity Characteristics of CMOS
Transistors in a 0.13 µm Process,” in IEEE RFIC Symposium, 2005.
[16] B. Toole, C. Plett, and M. Cloutier, “RF Circuit Implications of Moderate
Inversion Enhanced Linear Region in MOSFETs,” IEEE Transactions
on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers, vol. 51, no. 2, pp. 319–328,
2004.
[17] N. Trung-Kien et al., “A Low-Power RF Direct-Conversion Re-
ceiver/Transmitter for 2.4-GHz-Band IEEE 802.15.4 Standard in 0.18-
µm CMOS Technology,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and
Techniques, vol. 54, no. 12, pp. 4062–4071, 2006.
[18] R. Fiorelli et al., “2.4-GHz Single-Ended Input Low-Power Low-Voltage
Active Front-End for ZigBee Applications in 90 nm CMOS,” in 20th
European Conference on Circuit Theory and Design (ECCTD), 2011.
[19] C. Kim et al., “Design Guide of Coupling Between Inductors and
its Effect on Reverse Isolation of a CMOS LNA,” in IEEE MTT-S
International Microwave Symposium Digest, 2000.
[20] V. Subramanian and G. Boeck, “On-Chip Electromagnetic Interactions in
CMOS Cascode LNAs,” in IEEE RF Integration Technology Workshop
(RFIT), 2007.
[21] R. Fiorelli, F. Silveira, and E. Peralias, “MOST Moderate-Weak-
Inversion Region as the Optimum Design Zone for CMOS 2.4-GHz
CS-LNAs,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques,
vol. 62, no. 3, pp. 556–566, 2014.
[22] HP 8510C Network Analyzer, Hewlett-Packard Company, 1999.
[23] V. Rizzoli, A. Lipparini, and F. Mastri, “Computation of Large-Signal
S-parameters by Harmonic-Balance Techniques,” Electronics Letters,
vol. 24, no. 6, pp. 329–330, 1988.
[24] J. Gonz´alez Rios et al., “Analysis of Process Variations’ Impact on a
2.4 GHz 90 nm CMOS LNA,” in IEEE Latin American Symposium on
Circuits and Systems (LASCAS), Cusco, Peru, 2013.
[25] G. Gonz´alez, Microwave Transistor Amplifiers: Analysis and Design,
2nd ed.
New Jersey: Prentice Hall, 1997.