

--- PAGE BREAK ---

RF CIRCUIT DESIGN

--- PAGE BREAK ---

This page intentionally left blank 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

RF CIRCUIT DESIGN
CHRISTOPHER BOWICK
WITH
JOHN BLYLER AND CHERYL AJLUNI
AMSTERDAM • BOSTON • HEIDELBERG • LONDON • NEW YORK • OXFORD
PARIS • SAN DIEGO • SAN FRANCISCO • SINGAPORE • SYDNEY • TOKYO
Newnes is an imprint of Elsevier

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Cover image by iStockphoto
Newnes is an imprint of Elsevier
30 Corporate Drive, Suite 400, Burlington, MA 01803, USA
Linacre House, Jordan Hill, Oxford OX2 8DP, UK
Copyright © 2008, Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in
any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise,
without the prior written permission of the publisher.
Permissions may be sought directly from Elsevier’s Science & Technology Rights
Department in Oxford, UK: phone: (+44) 1865 843830, fax: (+44) 1865 853333,
E-mail: permissions@elsevier.com. You may also complete your request online
via the Elsevier homepage (http://elsevier.com), by selecting “Support & Contact”
then “Copyright and Permission” and then “Obtaining Permissions.”
Recognizing the importance of preserving what has been written, Elsevier prints its books on
acid-free paper whenever possible.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Bowick, Chris.
RF circuit design / Christopher Bowick. — 2nd ed.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN-13: 978-0-7506-8518-4
ISBN-10: 0-7506-8518-2
1. Radio circuits Design and construction. 2. Radio frequency. I. Title.
TK6553.B633 2008
621.384'12—dc22
2007036371
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
ISBN: 978-0-7506-8518-4
For information on all Newnes publications
visit our web site at http://books.elsevier.com
Typeset by Charon Tec Ltd (A Macmillan Company), Chennai, India
www.charontec.com
07 08 09 10
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Printed in the United States of America

--- PAGE BREAK ---

To my children—Isabel and Juan—who have brought me more happiness and grey
hairs than I thought possible. Y para mi esposa Rosa, con amor. — JEB
To my husband, Tom, my daughters, Alexis and Emily, and mother, Fran . . . without
whose constant cooperation, support and love I never would have found the time or
energy to complete this project. — Cheryl Ajluni

--- PAGE BREAK ---

This page intentionally left blank 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CONTENTS
Preface
Acknowledgments
CHAPTER 1
Components and Systems
Wire – Resistors – Capacitors – Inductors – Toroids – Toroidal Inductor Design – Practical Winding Hints
CHAPTER 2
Resonant Circuits
Some Deﬁnitions – Resonance (Lossless Components) – Loaded Q – Insertion Loss – Impedance Transformation –
Coupling of Resonant Circuits – Summary
CHAPTER 3
Filter Design
Background – Modern Filter Design – Normalization and the Low-Pass Prototype – Filter Types – Frequency and
Impedance Scaling – High-Pass Filter Design – The Dual Network – Bandpass Filter Design – Summary of the
Bandpass Filter Design Procedure – Band-Rejection Filter Design – The Effects of Finite Q
CHAPTER 4
Impedance Matching
Background – The L Network – Dealing With Complex Loads – Three-Element Matching – Low-Q or Wideband
Matching Networks – The Smith Chart – Impedance Matching on the Smith Chart – Software Design Tools – Summary
CHAPTER 5
The Transistor at Radio Frequencies
RF Transistor Materials – The Transistor Equivalent Circuit – Y Parameters – S Parameters – Understanding RF
Transistor Data Sheets – Summary
CHAPTER 6
Small-Signal RF Ampliﬁer Design
Some Deﬁnitions – Transistor Biasing – Design Using Y Parameters – Design Using S Parameters

--- PAGE BREAK ---

viii
Contents
CHAPTER 7
RF (Large Signal) Power Ampliﬁers
RF Power Transistor Characteristics – Transistor Biasing – RF Semiconductor Devices – Power Ampliﬁer Design –
Matching to Coaxial Feedlines – Automatic Shutdown Circuitry – Broadband Transformers – Practical Winding Hints –
Summary
CHAPTER 8
RF Front-End Design
Higher Levels of Integration – Basic Receiver Architectures – ADC’S Effect on Front-End Design –
Software Deﬁned Radios – Case Study—Modern Communication Receiver
CHAPTER 9
RF Design Tools
Design Tool Basics – Design Languages – RFIC Design Flow – RFIC Design Flow Example – Simulation Example 1 –
Simulation Example 2 – Modeling – PCB Design – Packaging – Case Study – Summary
APPENDIX A
APPENDIX B
BIBLIOGRAPHY
INDEX

--- PAGE BREAK ---

PREFACE
A great deal has changed since Chris Bowick’s RF Circuit Design was ﬁrst published, some 25 years ago. In fact, we could just
say that the RF industry has changed quite a bit since the days of Marconi and Tesla—both technological visionaries woven into
the fabric of history as the men who enabled radio communications. Who could have envisioned that their innovations in the late
1800’s would lay the groundwork for the eventual creation of the radio—a key component in all mobile and portable communications
systems that exist today? Or, that their contributions would one day lead to such a compelling array of RF applications, ranging
from radar to the cordless telephone and everything in between. Today, the radio stands as the backbone of the wireless industry.
It is in virtually every wireless device, whether a cellular phone, measurement/instrumentation system used in manufacturing, satellite
communications system, television or the WLAN.
Of course, back in the early 1980s when this book was ﬁrst written, RF was generally seen as a defense/military technology. It
was utilized in the United States weapons arsenal as well as for things like radar and anti-jamming devices. In 1985, that image
of RF changed when the FCC essentially made several bands of wireless spectrum, the Industrial, Scientiﬁc, and Medical (ISM)
bands, available to the public on a license-free basis. By doing so—and perhaps without even fully comprehending the momentum
its actions would eventually create—the FCC planted the seeds of what would one day be a multibillion-dollar industry.
Today that industry is being driven not by aerospace and defense, but rather by the consumer demand for wireless applications that
allow “anytime, anywhere” connectivity. And, it is being enabled by a range of new and emerging radio protocols such as Bluetooth®,
Wi-Fi (802.11 WLAN), WiMAX, and ZigBee®, in addition to 3G and 4G cellular technologies like CDMA, EGPRS, GSM, and Long
Term Evolution (LTE). For evidence of this fact, one needs look no further than the cellular handset. Within one decade, between
roughly the years 1990 and 2000, this application emerged from a very small scale semiprofessional niche, to become an almost
omnipresent device, with the number of users equal to 18% of the world population. Today, nearly 2 billion people use mobile phones
on a daily basis—not just for their voice services, but for a growing number of social and mobile, data-centric Internet applications.
Thanks to the mobile phone and service telecommunications industry revolution, average consumers today not only expect pervasive,
ubiquitous mobility, they are demanding it.
But what will the future hold for the consumer RF application space? The answer to that question seems fairly well-deﬁned as the
RF industry now ﬁnds itself rallying behind a single goal: to realize true convergence. In other words, the future of the RF industry
lies in its ability to enable next-generation mobile devices to cross all of the boundaries of the RF spectrum. Essentially then, this
converged mobile device would bring together traditionally disparate functionality (e.g., mobile phone, television, PC and PDA) on
the mobile platform.
Again, nowhere is the progress of the converged mobile device more apparent than with the cellular handset. It offers the ideal
platform on which RF standards and technologies can converge to deliver a whole host of new functionality and capabilities that, as
a society, we may not even yet be able to imagine. Movement in that direction has already begun. According to analysts with the
IDC Worldwide Mobile Phone Tracker service, the converged mobile device market grew an estimated 42 percent in 2006 for a total
of over 80 million units. In the fourth quarter alone, vendors shipped a total of 23.5 million devices, 33 percent more than the same
quarter a year ago. That’s a fairly remarkable accomplishment considering that, prior to the mid-nineties, the possibility of true RF
convergence was thought unreachable. The mixing, sampling and direct-conversion technologies were simply deemed too clunky
and limited to provide the foundation necessary for implementation of such a vision.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Preface
Regardless of how and when the goal of true convergence is ﬁnally realized, one thing has become imminently clear in the midst of
all the growth and innovation of the past twenty ﬁve years—the RF industry is alive and well. More importantly, it is well primed
for a future full of continuing innovation and market growth.
Of course, while all of these changes created a wealth of business opportunities in the RF industry, they also created new challenges
for RF engineers pushing the limits of design further and further. Today, new opportunities signal new design challenges which
engineers—whether experts in RF technology or not—will likely have to face.
One key challenge is how to accommodate the need for multi-band reception in cellular handsets. Another stems from the need for
higher bandwidth at higher frequencies which, in turn, means that the critical dimensions of relevant parasitic elements shrink. As a
result, layout elements that once could be ignored (e.g., interconnect, contact areas and holes, and bond pads) become non-negligible
and inﬂuence circuit performance.
In response to these and other challenges, the electronics industry has innovated, and continues to innovate. Consider, for example,
that roughly 25 years ago or so, electronic design automation (EDA) was just an infant industry, particularly for high-frequency
RF and microwave engineering. While a few tools were commercially available, rather than use these solutions, most companies
opted to develop their own high-frequency design tools. As the design process became more complex and the in-house tools too
costly to develop and maintain, engineers turned to design automation to address their needs. Thanks to innovation from a variety
of EDA companies, engineers now have access to a full gamut of RF/microwave EDA products and methodologies to aid them with
everything from design and analysis to veriﬁcation.
But the innovation doesn’t stop there. RF front-end architectures have and will continue to evolve in step with cellular handsets
sporting multi-band reception. Multi-band subsystems and shrinking element sizes have coupled with ongoing trends toward lower
cost and decreasing time-to-market to create the need for tightly integrated RF front-ends and transceiver circuits. These high levels
of system integration have in turn given rise to single-chip modules that incorporate front-end ﬁlters, ampliﬁers and mixes. But
implementing single-chip RF front-end designs requires a balance of performance trade-offs between the interfacing subsystems,
namely, the antenna and digital baseband systems. Achieving the required system performance when implementing integrated RF
front-ends means that analog designers must now work more closely with their digital baseband counterpart, thus leading to greater
integration of the traditional analog–digital design teams.
Other areas of innovation in the RF industry will come from improved RF power transistors that promise to give wireless infrastructure
power ampliﬁers new levels of performance with better reliability and ruggedness. RFICs hope to extend the role of CMOS to enable
emerging mobile handsets to deliver multimedia functions from a compact package at lower cost. Incumbents like gallium arsenide
(GaAs) have moved to higher voltages to keep the pace going. Additionally, power ampliﬁer-duplexer-ﬁlter modules will rapidly
displace separate components in multi-band W-CDMA radios. Single-chip multimode transceivers will displace separate EDGE and
W-CDMA/HSDPA transceivers in W-EDGE handsets. And, to better handle parasitic and high-speed effects on circuits, accurate
modeling and back-annotation of ever-smaller layout elements will become critical, as will accurate electromagnetic (EM) modeling
of RF on-chip structures like coils and interconnect.
Still further innovation will come from emerging technologies in RF such as gallium nitride and micro-electro-mechanical systems
(MEMS). In the latter case, these advanced micromachined devices are being integrated with CMOS signal processing and condi-
tioning circuits for high-volume markets such as mobile phones and portable electronics. According to market research ﬁrm ABI
Research, by 2008 use of MEMs in mobile phones will take off. This is due to the technology’s small size, ﬂexibility and performance
advantages, all of which are critical to enabling the adaptive, multifunction handsets of the future.
It is this type of innovation, coupled with the continuously changing landscape of existing application and market opportunities,
which has prompted a renewed look at the content in RF Circuit Design. It quickly became clear that, in order for this book
to continue to serve its purpose as your hands-on guide to RF circuit design, changes were required. As a result, this new 25th
anniversary edition comes to you with updated information on existing topics like resonant circuits, impedance matching and RF
ampliﬁer design, as well as new content pertaining to RF front-end design and RF design tools. This information is applicable to
any engineer working in today’s dynamically changing RF industry, as well as for those true visionaries working on the cusp of the
information/communication/entertainment market convergence which the RF industry now inspires.
Cheryl Ajluni and John Blyler

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
No man—or woman—is an island. Many very busy people helped to make this update of Chris’s original book possible. Here are
just a few of the main contributors—old friends and new—who gave generously of their time and expertise in the review of the RF
Front-End chapter of this book: Special thanks to George Zaﬁropoulos, VP of Marketing, at Synopsys for also rekindling my interest
in amateur radio; Colin Warwick, RF Product Manager, The MathWorks, Inc., (Thanks for a very thorough review!); Rick Lazansky,
R&D Manager, Agilent EEs of EDA; David Ewing, Director of Software Engineering at Synapse and George Opsahl, President of
Clearbrook Technology.
One of the most challenging tasks in preparing any technical piece is the selection of the right case study. This task was made easier
for me by the help of both Analog Devices, Inc., and by Jean Rousset, consultant to Agilent Technologies.
This update would not have been possible without the help of Cheryl Ajluni—my co-author, friend, and former editor of Penton’s
Wireless Systems Design magazine. Additional thanks to Jack Browne, editor of Microwave and RF magazine, for his insights and
content sharing at a critical juncture during my writing. Last but not least, I thank the two most important people to any published
book author—namely the acquisition editor, Rachel Roumeliotis and the project manager, Anne B. McGee at Elsevier. Great job,
everyone!
John Blyler
This revised version of RF Circuit Design would not have been possible were it not for the tireless efforts of many friends and
colleagues, to all of whom I offer my utmost gratitude and respect. Their technical contributions, reviews and honest opinions
helped me more than they will ever know. With that said, I want to offer special thanks to Doron Aronson, Michael C’deBaca,
Joseph Curcurio, John Dunn, Suzanne Graham, Sonia Harrison, Victoria Juarez de Savin, Jim Lev, Daren McClearnon, Tom Quan,
Mark Ravenstahl, Craig Schmidt, Dave Smith, Janet Smith, Heidi Vantulden, and Per Viklund; as well as the following companies:
Agilent Technologies, Ansoft, Applied Wave Research, Cadence Design Systems, Mentor Graphics, Microwave Software, and The
MathWorks, Inc.
To all of the folks at Elsevier who contributed in some way to this book—Anne B. McGee, Ganesan Murugesan and Rachel
Roumeliotis—your work ethic, constant assistance and patience have been very much appreciated.
To Cindy Shamieh, whose excellent research skills provided the basis for many of the revisions throughout this version of the book—
your efforts and continued friendship mean the world to me.
And last, but certainly not least, to John Blyler my friend and co-author—thank you for letting me share this journey with you.
Cheryl Ajluni

--- PAGE BREAK ---

This page intentionally left blank 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C H A P T E R 1
COMPONENTS
and Systems
omponents, those bits and pieces which make up
a radio frequency (RF) circuit, seem at times to
be taken for granted. A capacitor is, after all, a
capacitor—isn’t it? A 1-megohm resistor presents
an impedance of at least 1 megohm—doesn’t it?
The reactance of an inductor always increases with frequency,
right? Well, as we shall see later in this discussion, things aren’t
always as they seem. Capacitors at certain frequencies may not
be capacitors at all, but may look inductive, while inductors may
look like capacitors, and resistors may tend to be a little of both.
In this chapter, we will discuss the properties of resistors, capac-
itors, and inductors at radio frequencies as they relate to circuit
design. But, ﬁrst, let’s take a look at the most simple component
of any system and examine its problems at radio frequencies.
WIRE
Wire in an RF circuit can take many forms. Wirewound resistors,
inductors, and axial- and radial-leaded capacitors all use a wire
of some size and length either in their leads, or in the actual body
of the component, or both. Wire is also used in many interconnect
applications in the lower RF spectrum. The behavior of a wire in
the RF spectrum depends to a large extent on the wire’s diameter
and length. Table 1-1 lists, in the American Wire Gauge (AWG)
system, each gauge of wire, its corresponding diameter, and
other characteristics of interest to the RF circuit designer. In
the AWG system, the diameter of a wire will roughly double
every six wire gauges. Thus, if the last six gauges and their
corresponding diameters are memorized from the chart, all other
wire diameters can be determined without the aid of a chart
(Example 1-1).
Skin Effect
A conductor, at low frequencies, utilizes its entire cross-sectional
area as a transport medium for charge carriers. As the frequency
is increased, an increased magnetic ﬁeld at the center of the
conductor presents an impedance to the charge carriers, thus
decreasing the current density at the center of the conductor
and increasing the current density around its perimeter. This
increased current density near the edge of the conductor is known
as skin effect. It occurs in all conductors including resistor leads,
capacitor leads, and inductor leads.
EXAMPLE 1-1
Given that the diameter of AWG 50 wire is 1.0 mil (0.001
inch), what is the diameter of AWG 14 wire?
Solution
AWG 50 = 1 mil
AWG 44 = 2 × 1 mil = 2 mils
AWG 38 = 2 × 2 mils = 4 mils
AWG 32 = 2 × 4 mils = 8 mils
AWG 26 = 2× 8 mils = 16 mils
AWG 20 = 2 × 16 mils = 32 mils
AWG 14 = 2 × 32 mils = 64 mils (0.064 inch)
The depth into the conductor at which the charge-carrier current
density falls to 1/e, or 37% of its value along the surface, is
known as the skin depth and is a function of the frequency and
the permeability and conductivity of the medium. Thus, differ-
ent conductors, such as silver, aluminum, and copper, all have
different skin depths.
The net result of skin effect is an effective decrease in the cross-
sectional area of the conductor and, therefore, a net increase in
the ac resistance of the wire as shown in Fig. 1-1. For copper,
the skin depth is approximately 0.85 cm at 60 Hz and 0.007 cm
at 1 MHz. Or, to state it another way: 63% of the RF current
ﬂowing in a copper wire will ﬂow within a distance of 0.007 cm
of the outer edge of the wire.
Straight-Wire Inductors
Inthemediumsurroundinganycurrent-carryingconductor, there
exists a magnetic ﬁeld. If the current in the conductor is an
alternating current, this magnetic ﬁeld is alternately expanding
and contracting and, thus, producing a voltage on the wire which
opposes any change in current ﬂow. This opposition to change
is called self-inductance and we call anything that possesses this
quality an inductor. Straight-wire inductance might seem trivial,
but as will be seen later in the chapter, the higher we go in
frequency, the more important it becomes.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
A1  pr1
A2  pr2
 p(r2
2  r1
Skin Depth Area  A2  A1
RF current flow
in shaded region
FIG. 1-1.
Skin depth area of a conductor.
The inductance of a straight wire depends on both its length and
its diameter, and is found by:
L = 0.002l
2.3 log
−0.75
(Eq. 1-1)
where,
L = the inductance in μH,
l = the length of the wire in cm,
d = the diameter of the wire in cm.
This is shown in calculations of Example 1-2.
EXAMPLE 1-2
Find the inductance of 5 centimeters of No. 22 copper
wire.
Solution
From Table 1-1, the diameter of No. 22 copper wire is
25.3 mils. Since 1 mil equals 2.54 × 10−3 cm, this equals
0.0643 cm. Substituting into Equation 1-1 gives
L = (0.002)(5)
2.3 log
4(5)
0.0643
−0.75
= 50 nanohenries
The concept of inductance is important because any and all con-
ductors at radio frequencies (including hookup wire, capacitor
leads, etc.) tend to exhibit the property of inductance. Inductors
will be discussed in greater detail later in this chapter.
RESISTORS
Resistance is the property of a material that determines the rate at
which electrical energy is converted into heat energy for a given
electric current. By deﬁnition:
1 volt across 1 ohm = 1 coulomb per second
= 1 ampere
The thermal dissipation in this circumstance is 1 watt.
P = EI
= 1 volt × 1 ampere
= 1 watt
Resistors are used everywhere in circuits, as transistor bias net-
works, pads, and signal combiners. However, very rarely is there
any thought given to how a resistor actually behaves once we
depart from the world of direct current (DC). In some instances,
such as in transistor biasing networks, the resistor will still per-
form its DC circuit function, but it may also disrupt the circuit’s
RF operating point.
Resistor Equivalent Circuit
The equivalent circuit of a resistor at radio frequencies is
shown in Fig. 1-2. R is the resistor value itself, L is the lead
inductance, and C is a combination of parasitic capacitances
which varies from resistor to resistor depending on the resistor’s
structure. Carbon-composition resistors are notoriously poor
high-frequency performers. A carbon-composition resistor con-
sists of densely packed dielectric particulates or carbon granules.
Between each pair of carbon granules is a very small parasitic
capacitor. These parasitics, in aggregate, are not insigniﬁcant,
however, and are the major component of the device’s equivalent
circuit.
FIG. 1-2.
Resistor equivalent circuit.
Wirewound resistors have problems at radio frequencies too. As
may be expected, these resistors tend to exhibit widely varying
impedances over various frequencies. This is particularly true
of the low resistance values in the frequency range of 10 MHz
to 200 MHz. The inductor L, shown in the equivalent circuit
of Fig. 1-2, is much larger for a wirewound resistor than for
a carbon-composition resistor. Its value can be calculated using
the single-layer air-core inductance approximation formula. This
formula is discussed later in this chapter. Because wirewound
resistors look like inductors, their impedances will ﬁrst increase
as the frequency increases. At some frequency (Fr), however,
the inductance (L) will resonate with the shunt capacitance (C),
producing an impedance peak.Any further increase in frequency
will cause the resistor’s impedance to decrease as shown in
Fig. 1-3.
A metal-ﬁlm resistor seems to exhibit the best characteris-
tics over frequency. Its equivalent circuit is the same as the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Resistors
Frequency (F)
Impedance (Z)
FIG. 1-3.
Impedance characteristic of a wirewound resistor.
carbon-compositionandwirewoundresistor, butthevaluesofthe
individual parasitic elements in the equivalent circuit decrease.
The impedance of a metal-ﬁlm resistor tends to decrease with
frequency above about 10 MHz, as shown in Fig. 1-4. This is
due to the shunt capacitance in the equivalent circuit. At very
high frequencies, and with low-value resistors (under 50 ), lead
inductance and skin effect may become noticeable. The lead
inductance produces a resonance peak, as shown for the 5 
resistance in Fig. 1-4, and skin effect decreases the slope of the
curve as it falls off with frequency.
Carbon Composition
Frequency (MHz)
1000
1 MΩ
100 KΩ
10 KΩ
100 Ω
Impedance (% dc resistance)
FIG. 1-4.
Frequency characteristics of metal-ﬁlm vs. carbon-composition
resistors. (Adapted from Handbook of Components for Electronics,
McGraw-Hill)
Many manufacturers will supply data on resistor behavior at
radio frequencies but it can often be misleading. Once you under-
stand the mechanisms involved in resistor behavior, however, it
will not matter in what form the data is supplied. Example 1-3
illustrates that fact.
The recent trend in resistor technology has been to eliminate or
greatly reduce the stray reactances associated with resistors. This
has led to the development of thin-ﬁlm chip resistors, such as
EXAMPLE 1-3
In Fig. 1-2, the lead lengths on the metal-ﬁlm resistor are
1.27 cm (0.5 inch), and are made up of No. 14 wire. The
total stray shunt capacitance (C) is 0.3 pF. If the resistor
value is 10,000 ohms, what is its equivalent RF impedance
at 200 MHz?
Solution
From Table 1-1, the diameter of No. 14 AWG wire is 64.1
mils (0.1628 cm). Therefore, using Equation 1-1:
L = (0.002)(1.27)
2.3 log
4(1.27)
0.1628 −0.75
= 8.7 nanohenries
This presents an equivalent reactance at 200 MHz of:
XL = ωL
= 2π(200 × 106)(8.7 × 10−9)
= 10.93 ohms
The capacitor (C) presents an equivalent reactance of:
Xc = 1
2π(200 × 106)(0.3 × 10−12)
= 2653
The combined equivalent circuit for this resistor, at 200
MHz, is shown in Fig. 1-5.
 j2653 Ω
j10.93 Ω
j10.93 Ω
10 K
FIG. 1-5.
Equivalent circuit values for Example 1-3.
From this sketch, we can see that, in this case, the lead
inductance is insigniﬁcant when compared with the 10K
series resistance and it may be neglected. The parasitic
capacitance, on the other hand, cannot be neglected.
What we now have, in effect, is a 2653  reactance in
parallel with a 10,000  resistance. The magnitude of the
combined impedance is:
R2 + X2
(10K)(2653)
(10K)2 + (2653)2
= 2564.3 ohms
Thus, our 10K resistor looks like 2564 ohms at 200 MHz.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
those shown in Fig. 1-6. They are typically produced on alumina
or beryllia substrates and offer very little parasitic reactance at
frequencies from DC to 2 GHz.
FIG. 1-6.
Thin-ﬁlm resistors. (Courtesy of Vishay Intertechnology)
CAPACITORS
Capacitors are used extensively in RF applications, such as
bypassing, interstage coupling, and in resonant circuits and ﬁl-
ters. It is important to remember, however, that not all capacitors
lend themselves equally well to each of the above-mentioned
applications. The primary task of the RF circuit designer, with
regard to capacitors, is to choose the best capacitor for his par-
ticular application. Cost effectiveness is usually a major factor
in the selection process and, thus, many trade-offs occur. In this
section, we’ll take a look at the capacitor’s equivalent circuit
and we will examine a few of the various types of capacitors
used at radio frequencies to see which are best suited for certain
applications. But ﬁrst, a little review.
Parallel-Plate Capacitor
A capacitor is any device which consists of two conducting
surfaces separated by an insulating material or dielectric. The
dielectric is usually ceramic, air, paper, mica, plastic, ﬁlm, glass,
or oil. The capacitance of a capacitor is that property which per-
mits the storage of a charge when a potential difference exists
between the conductors. Capacitance is measured in units of
farads. A 1-farad capacitor’s potential is raised by 1 volt when it
receives a charge of 1 coulomb.
C = Q
where,
C = capacitance in farads,
Q = charge in coulombs,
V = voltage in volts.
However, the farad is much too impractical to work with, so
smaller units were devised.
1 microfarad = 1 μF = 1 × 10−6 farad
1 picofarad = 1 pF = 1 × 10−12 farad
As stated previously, a capacitor in its fundamental form consists
of two metal plates separated by a dielectric material of some
sort. If we know the area (A) of each metal plate, the distance
(d) between the plate (in inches), and the permittivity (ε) of the
dielectric material in farads/meter (f/m), the capacitance of a
parallel-plate capacitor can be found by:
C = 0.2249εA
picofarads
(Eq. 1-2)
where
ε0 = free-space permittivity = 8.854 × 10−12 f/m.
In Equation 1-2, the area (A) must be large with respect to the
distance (d). The ratio of ε to ε0 is known as the dielectric con-
stant (k) of the material. The dielectric constant is a number that
provides a comparison of the given dielectric with air (see Fig.
1-7). The ratio of ε/ε0 for air is, of course, 1. If the dielectric
constant of a material is greater than 1, its use in a capacitor as
a dielectric will permit a greater amount of capacitance for the
same dielectric thickness as air. Thus, if a material’s dielectric
constant is 3, it will produce a capacitor having three times the
capacitance of one that has air as its dielectric. For a given value
of capacitance, then, higher dielectric-constant materials will
produce physically smaller capacitors. But, because the dielec-
tric plays such a major role in determining the capacitance of
a capacitor, it follows that the inﬂuence of a dielectric on
capacitor operation, over frequency and temperature, is often
important.
Dielectric
Polystrene
Paper
Mica
Ceramic (low K)
Ceramic (high K)
10010,000
FIG. 1-7.
Dielectric constants of some common materials.
Real-World Capacitors
The usage of a capacitor is primarily dependent upon the char-
acteristics of its dielectric. The dielectric’s characteristics also
determine the voltage levels and the temperature extremes at
which the device may be used. Thus, any losses or imperfections
in the dielectric have an enormous effect on circuit operation.
TheequivalentcircuitofacapacitorisshowninFig.1-8, where C
equals the capacitance, Rs is the heat-dissipation loss expressed
either as a power factor (PF) or as a dissipation factor (DF), Rp

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Capacitors
FIG. 1-8.
Capacitor equivalent circuit.
is the insulation resistance, and L is the inductance of the leads
and plates. Some deﬁnitions are needed now.
Power Factor—In a perfect capacitor, the alternating current
will lead the applied voltage by 90◦. This phase angle (φ) will
be smaller in a real capacitor due to the total series resistance
(Rs + Rp) that is shown in the equivalent circuit. Thus,
PF = cos φ
The power factor is a function of temperature, frequency, and
the dielectric material.
Insulation Resistance—This is a measure of the amount of DC
current that ﬂows through the dielectric of a capacitor with a
voltage applied. No material is a perfect insulator; thus, some
leakage current must ﬂow. This current path is represented by Rp
in the equivalent circuit and, typically, it has a value of 100,000
megohms or more.
Effective Series Resistance—Abbreviated ESR, this resistance
is the combined equivalent of Rs and Rp, and is the AC resis-
tance of a capacitor.
ESR = PF
ωC (1 × 106)
where
ω = 2πf
Dissipation Factor – The DF is the ratio of AC resistance to the
reactance of a capacitor and is given by the formula:
DF = ESR
× 100%
Q – The Q of a circuit is the reciprocal of DF and is deﬁned as
the quality factor of a capacitor.
DF = Xc
Thus, the larger the Q, the better the capacitor.
The effect of these imperfections in the capacitor can be seen
in the graph of Fig. 1-9. Here, the impedance characteristic of
an ideal capacitor is plotted against that of a real-world capaci-
tor. As shown, as the frequency of operation increases, the lead
inductance becomes important. Finally, at Fr, the inductance
becomes series resonant with the capacitor. Then, above Fr, the
capacitor acts like an inductor. In general, larger-value capaci-
tors tend to exhibit more internal inductance than smaller-value
capacitors. Therefore, depending upon its internal structure, a
Inductive
Ideal Capacitor
Frequency
Capacitive
Impedance (ohms)
RS  RP
FIG. 1-9.
Impedance characteristic vs. frequency.
0.1-μF capacitor may not be as good as a 300-pF capacitor
in a bypass application at 250 MHz. In other words, the clas-
sic formula for capacitive reactance, Xe =
ωC , might seem to
indicate that larger-value capacitors have less reactance than
smaller-value capacitors at a given frequency.At RF frequencies,
however, the opposite may be true. At certain higher frequen-
cies, a 0.1-μF capacitor might present a higher impedance to
the signal than would a 330-pF capacitor. This is something that
must be considered when designing circuits at frequencies above
100 MHz. Ideally, each component that is to be used in anyVHF,
or higher frequency, design should be examined on a network
analyzer similar to the one shown in Fig. 1-10. This will allow
the designer to know exactly what he is working with before it
goes into the circuit.
FIG. 1-10.
Agilent E5071C Network Analyzer.
Capacitor Types
There are many different dielectric materials used in the fab-
rication of capacitors, such as paper, plastic, ceramic, mica,
polystyrene, polycarbonate, teﬂon, oil, glass, and air. Each
material has its advantages and disadvantages. The RF designer

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
is left with a myriad of capacitor types that he could use in
any particular application and the ultimate decision to use a
particular capacitor is often based on convenience rather than
good sound judgment. In many applications, this approach
simply cannot be tolerated. This is especially true in manu-
facturing environments where more than just one unit is to be
built and where they must operate reliably over varying tem-
perature extremes. It is often said in the engineering world that
anyone can design something and make it work once, but it
takes a good designer to develop a unit that can be produced in
quantity and still operate as it should in different temperature
environments.
Ceramic Capacitors
Ceramic dielectric capacitors vary widely in both dielectric
constant (k = 5 to 10,000) and temperature characteristics. A
good rule of thumb to use is: “The higher the k, the worse is
its temperature characteristic.” This is shown quite clearly in
Fig. 1-11.
PPM Envelope
Temperature
Compensating
(NPO)
Moderately
Stable
General-
Purpose
(High K)
Temperature, °C
PPM Cap Change
% Cap Change
% Cap Change
25 45
65 85 105 125
FIG. 1-11.
Temperature characteristics for ceramic dielectric capacitors.
As illustrated, low-k ceramic capacitors tend to have linear
temperature characteristics. These capacitors are generally man-
ufactured using both magnesium titanate, which has a positive
temperature coefﬁcient (TC), and calcium titanate which has a
negative TC. By combining the two materials in varying pro-
portions, a range of controlled temperature coefﬁcients can
be generated. These capacitors are sometimes called tempera-
ture compensating capacitors, or NPO (negative positive zero)
ceramics. They can have TCs that range anywhere from +150
to −4700 ppm/◦C (parts-per-million-per-degree-Celsius) with
tolerances as small as ±15 ppm/◦C. Because of their excel-
lent temperature stability, NPO ceramics are well suited for
oscillator, resonant circuit, or ﬁlter applications.
Moderately stable ceramic capacitors (Fig. 1-11) typically vary
±15% of their rated capacitance over their temperature range.
This variation is typically nonlinear, however, and care should
be taken in their use in resonant circuits or ﬁlters where stability
is important. These ceramics are generally used in switching
circuits. Their main advantage is that they are generally smaller
than the NPO ceramic capacitors and, of course, cost less.
High-K ceramic capacitors are typically termed general-purpose
capacitors. Their temperature characteristics are very poor and
their capacitance may vary as much as 80% over various tem-
perature ranges (Fig. 1-11). They are commonly used only in
bypass applications at radio frequencies.
There are ceramic capacitors available on the market which are
speciﬁcally intended for RF applications. These capacitors are
typically high-Q (low ESR) devices with ﬂat ribbon leads or
with no leads at all. The lead material is usually solid silver or
silver plated and, thus, contains very low resistive losses. At
VHF frequencies and above, these capacitors exhibit very low
lead inductance due to the ﬂat ribbon leads. These devices are, of
course, more expensive and require special printed-circuit board
areas for mounting. The capacitors that have no leads are called
chip capacitors. These capacitors are typically used above 500
MHz where lead inductance cannot be tolerated. Chip capacitors
and ﬂat ribbon capacitors are shown in Fig. 1-12.
FIG. 1-12.
Chip and ceramic capacitors. (Courtesy of Wikipedia)
Mica Capacitors
Mica capacitors typically have a dielectric constant of about 6,
which indicates that for a particular capacitance value, mica
capacitors are typically large. Their low k, however, also pro-
duces an extremely good temperature characteristic. Thus, mica
capacitors are used extensively in resonant circuits and in ﬁlters
where PC board area is of no concern.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Inductors
Silvered mica capacitors are even more stable. Ordinary mica
capacitors have plates of foil pressed against the mica dielec-
tric. In silvered micas, the silver plates are applied by a process
called vacuum evaporation which is a much more exacting pro-
cess. This produces an even better stability with very tight and
reproducible tolerances of typically +20 ppm/◦C over a range
−60◦C to +89◦C.
The problem with micas, however, is that they are becoming
increasingly less cost effective than ceramic types. Therefore, if
you have an application in which a mica capacitor would seem
to work well, chances are you can ﬁnd a less expensive NPO
ceramic capacitor that will work just as well.
Metalized-Film Capacitors
“Metalized-ﬁlm” is a broad category of capacitor encompass-
ing most of the other capacitors listed previously and which
we have not yet discussed. This includes teﬂon, polystyrene,
polycarbonate, and paper dielectrics.
Metalized-ﬁlm capacitors are used in a number of applications,
including ﬁltering, bypassing, and coupling. Most of the poly-
carbonate, polystyrene, and teﬂon styles are available in very
tight (±2%) capacitance tolerances over their entire temper-
ature range. Polystyrene, however, typically cannot be used
over +85◦C as it is very temperature sensitive above this point.
Most of the capacitors in this category are typically larger than
the equivalent-value ceramic types and are used in applications
where space is not a constraint.
INDUCTORS
An inductor is nothing more than a wire wound or coiled in
such a manner as to increase the magnetic ﬂux linkage between
the turns of the coil (see Fig. 1-13). This increased ﬂux linkage
increases the wire’s self-inductance (or just plain inductance)
beyond that which it would otherwise have been. Inductors are
FIG. 1-13.
Simple inductors. (Courtesy of Wikipedia)
used extensively in RF design in resonant circuits, ﬁlters, phase
shift and delay networks, and as RF chokes used to prevent, or
at least reduce, the ﬂow of RF energy along a certain path.
Real-World Inductors
As we have discovered in previous sections of this chapter,
there is no “perfect” component, and inductors are certainly no
exception. As a matter of fact, of the components we have dis-
cussed, the inductor is probably the component most prone to
very drastic changes over frequency.
Fig. 1-14 shows what an inductor really looks like at RF fre-
quencies. As previously discussed, whenever we bring two
conductors into close proximity but separated by a dielectric,
and place a voltage differential between the two, we form a
capacitor. Thus, if any wire resistance at all exists, a voltage
drop (even though very minute) will occur between the wind-
ings, and small capacitors will be formed. This effect is shown
in Fig. 1-14 and is called distributed capacitance (Cd). Then, in
Fig. 1-15, the capacitance (Cd) is an aggregate of the individual
parasitic distributed capacitances of the coil shown in Fig. 1-14.
The effect of Cd upon the reactance of an inductor is shown in
Fig. 1-16. Initially, at lower frequencies, the inductor’s reactance
parallels that of an ideal inductor. Soon, however, its reactance
departs from the ideal curve and increases at a much faster
rate until it reaches a peak at the inductor’s parallel resonant
frequency (Fr). Above Fr, the inductor’s reactance begins to
FIG. 1-14.
Distributed capacitance and series resistance in an inductor.
FIG. 1-15.
Inductor equivalent circuit.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
Ideal Inductor
Impedance
Frequency
Inductive
Capacitive
FIG. 1-16.
Impedance characteristic vs. frequency for a practical and an
ideal inductor.
EXAMPLE 1-4
To show that the impedance of a lossless inductor at
resonance is inﬁnite, we can write the following:
XLXC
XL + XC
(Eq.1-3)
where
Z = the impedance of the parallel circuit,
XL = the inductive reactance (jωL),
XC = the capacitive reactance
Therefore,
jωL +
(Eq.1-4)
Multiplying numerator and denominator by jωC, we get:
(jωL)(jωC) + 1
j 2ω2LC + 1
(Eq.1-5)
From algebra, j2 = −1; then, rearranging:
1 −ω2LC
(Eq.1-6)
If the term ω2LC, in Equation 1-6, should ever become
equal to 1, then the denominator will be equal to zero
and impedance Z will become inﬁnite. The frequency at
which ω2LC becomes equal to 1 is:
ω2LC = 1
LC = 1
LC = 1
LC = 1
EXAMPLE 4-4—Cont
(Eq.1-7)
which is the familiar equation for the resonant frequency
of a tuned circuit.
FIG. 1-17.
Chip inductors. (Courtesy of Wikipedia)
decrease with frequency and, thus, the inductor begins to look
like a capacitor. Theoretically, the resonance peak would occur at
inﬁnite reactance (see Example 1-4). However, due to the series
resistance of the coil, some ﬁnite impedance is seen at resonance.
Recent advances in inductor technology have led to the develop-
ment of microminiature ﬁxed-chip inductors. One type is shown
in Fig. 1-17. These inductors feature a ceramic substrate with
gold-plated solderable wrap-around bottom connections. They
come in values from 0.01 μH to 1.0 mH, with typical Qs that
range from 40 to 60 at 200 MHz.
It was mentioned earlier that the series resistance of a coil is
the mechanism that keeps the impedance of the coil ﬁnite at
resonance. Another effect it has is to broaden the resonance peak
of the impedance curve of the coil. This characteristic of resonant
circuits is an important one and will be discussed in detail in
Chapter 3.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Inductors
Frequency
FIG. 1-18.
The Q variation of an inductor vs. frequency.
The ratio of an inductor’s reactance to its series resistance is
often used as a measure of the quality of the inductor. The larger
the ratio, the better is the inductor. This quality factor is referred
to as the Q of the inductor.
Q = X
If the inductor were wound with a perfect conductor, its Q would
beinﬁniteandwewouldhavealosslessinductor. Ofcourse, there
is no perfect conductor and, thus, an inductor always has some
ﬁnite Q.
At low frequencies, the Q of an inductor is very good because
the only resistance in the windings is the dc resistance of the
wire—which is very small. But as the frequency increases, skin
effect and winding capacitance begin to degrade the quality of
the inductor. This is shown in the graph of Fig. 1-18. At low
frequencies, Q will increase directly with frequency because
its reactance is increasing and skin effect has not yet become
noticeable. Soon, however, skin effect does become a factor.
The Q still rises, but at a lesser rate, and we get a gradually
decreasing slope in the curve. The ﬂat portion of the curve in
Fig. 1-18 occurs as the series resistance and the reactance are
changingatthesamerate.Abovethispoint, theshuntcapacitance
and skin effect of the windings combine to decrease the Q of the
inductor to zero at its resonant frequency.
Some methods of increasing the Q of an inductor and extending
its useful frequency range are:
1. Use a larger diameter wire. This decreases the AC and
DC resistance of the windings.
2. Spread the windings apart. Air has a lower dielectric
constant than most insulators. Thus, an air gap between
the windings decreases the interwinding capacitance.
3. Increase the permeability of the ﬂux linkage path. This
is most often done by winding the inductor around a
magnetic-core material, such as iron or ferrite. A coil
made in this manner will also consist of fewer turns for a
given inductance. This will be discussed in a later section
of this chapter.
FIG. 1-19.
Single-layer air-core inductor requirements.
Single-Layer Air-Core Inductor Design
EveryRFcircuitdesignerneedstoknowhowtodesigninductors.
It may be tedious at times, but it’s well worth the effort. The
formula that is generally used to design single-layer air-core
inductors is given in Equation 1-8 and diagrammed in Fig. 1-19.
L = 0.394r2N2
9r + 10l
(Eq. 1-8)
where
r = the coil radius in cm,
l = the coil length in cm,
L = the inductance in microhenries.
However, coil length l must be greater than 0.67r. This formula
is accurate to within one percent. See Example 1-5.
EXAMPLE 1-5
Design a 100 nH (0.1 μH) air-core inductor on a 1/4-inch
(0.635 cm) coil form.
Solution
For optimum Q, the length of the coil should be equal to
its diameter. Thus, l = 0.635 cm, r = 0.317 cm, and
L = 0.1μH.
Using Equation 1-8 and solving for N gives:
0.394r
where we have taken l = 2r, for optimum Q.
Substituting and solving:
29(0.1)
(0.394)(0.317)
= 4.8 turns
Thus, we need 4.8 turns of wire within a length of
0.635 cm. A look at Table 1-1 reveals that the largest
diameter enamel-coated wire that will allow 4.8 turns in a
length of 0.635 cm is No. 18 AWG wire which has a
diameter of 42.4 mils (0.107 cm).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
Wire
Ohms/
Area
Size
in Mils∗
in Mils
1000 ft.
Circular
(AWG)
(Bare)
(Coated)
Mils
289.3
0.124
83690
257.6
0.156
66360
229.4
0.197
52620
204.3
0.249
41740
181.9
0.313
33090
162.0
0.395
26240
144.3
0.498
20820
128.5
131.6
0.628
16510
114.4
116.3
0.793
13090
101.9
104.2
0.999
10380
90.7
93.5
1.26
8230
80.8
83.3
1.59
6530
72.0
74.1
2.00
5180
64.1
66.7
2.52
4110
57.1
59.5
3.18
3260
50.8
52.9
4.02
2580
45.3
47.2
5.05
2050
40.3
42.4
6.39
1620
35.9
37.9
8.05
1290
32.0
34.0
10.1
1020
28.5
30.2
12.8
25.3
27.0
16.2
22.6
24.2
20.3
20.1
21.6
25.7
17.9
19.3
32.4
∗1 mil = 2.54 × 10−3 cm
Wire
Ohms/
Area
Size
in Mils∗
in Mils
1000 ft.
Circular
(AWG)
(Bare)
(Coated)
Mils
15.9
17.2
41.0
14.2
15.4
51.4
12.6
13.8
65.3
11.3
12.3
81.2
10.0
11.0
104.0
79.2
64.0
50.4
39.7
31.4
25.0
20.2
16.0
12.2
1080
9.61
1320
7.84
1660
6.25
2140
4.84
2590
4.00
1.76
3350
3.10
1.57
4210
2.46
1.40
5290
1.96
1.24
6750
1.54
1.11
8420
1.23
10600
0.98
TABLE 1-1.
AWG Wire Chart
Keep in mind that even though optimum Q is attained when the
length of the coil (l) is equal to its diameter (2r), this is sometimes
not practical and, in many cases, the length is much greater than
the diameter. In Example 1-5, we calculated the need for 4.8
turns of wire in a length of 0.635 cm and decided that No. 18
AWG wire would ﬁt. The only problem with this approach is that
when the design is ﬁnished, we end up with a very tightly wound
coil. This increases the distributed capacitance between the turns
and, thus, lowers the useful frequency range of the inductor by
lowering its resonant frequency. We could take either one of the
following compromise solutions to this dilemma:
1. Use the next smallest AWG wire size to wind the inductor
while keeping the length (l) the same. This approach will
allow a small air gap between windings and, thus,
decrease the interwinding capacitance. It also, however,
increases the resistance of the windings by decreasing the
diameter of the conductor and, thus, it lowers the Q.
2. Extend the length of the inductor (while retaining the use
of No. 18 AWG wire) just enough to leave a small air gap
between the windings. This method will produce the
same effect as Method No. 1. It reduces the Q somewhat
but it decreases the interwinding capacitance
considerably.
Magnetic-Core Materials
In many RF applications, where large values of inductance
are needed in small areas, air-core inductors cannot be used
because of their size. One method of decreasing the size of a coil

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Toroids
while maintaining a given inductance is to decrease the num-
ber of turns while at the same time increasing its magnetic ﬂux
density. The ﬂux density can be increased by decreasing the
“reluctance” or magnetic resistance path that links the windings
of the inductor. We do this by adding a magnetic-core material,
such as iron or ferrite, to the inductor. The permeability (μ) of
this material is much greater than that of air and, thus, the mag-
netic ﬂux isn’t as “reluctant” to ﬂow between the windings. The
net result of adding a high permeability core to an inductor is the
gaining of the capability to wind a given inductance with fewer
turns than what would be required for an air-core inductor. Thus,
several advantages can be realized.
1. Smaller size—due to the fewer number of turns needed
for a given inductance.
2. Increased Q—fewer turns means less wire resistance.
3. Variability—obtained by moving the magnetic core in
and out of the windings.
There are some major problems that are introduced by the use of
magnetic cores, however, and care must be taken to ensure that
the core that is chosen is the right one for the job. Some of the
problems are:
1. Each core tends to introduce its own losses. Thus, adding
a magnetic core to an air-core inductor could possibly
decrease the Q of the inductor, depending on the material
used and the frequency of operation.
2. The permeability of all magnetic cores changes with
frequency and usually decreases to a very small value at
the upper end of their operating range. It eventually
approaches the permeability of air and becomes
“invisible” to the circuit.
3. The higher the permeability of the core, the more
sensitive it is to temperature variation. Thus, over wide
temperature ranges, the inductance of the coil may vary
appreciably.
4. The permeability of the magnetic core changes with
applied signal level. If too large an excitation is applied,
saturation of the core will result.
These problems can be overcome if care is taken, in the
design process, to choose cores wisely. Manufacturers now sup-
ply excellent literature on available sizes and types of cores,
complete with their important characteristics.
TOROIDS
A toroid, very simply, is a ring or doughnut-shaped magnetic
material that is widely used to wind RF inductors and trans-
formers. Toroids are usually made of iron or ferrite. They come
in various shapes and sizes (Fig. 1-20) with widely varying char-
acteristics. When used as cores for inductors, they can typically
yield very high Qs. They are self-shielding, compact, and best
of all, easy to use.
FIG. 1-20.
Toroidal core inductor. (Courtesy of Allied Electronics)
The Q of a toroidal inductor is typically high because the toroid
can be made with an extremely high permeability. As was dis-
cussed in an earlier section, high permeability cores allow the
designer to construct an inductor with a given inductance (for
example, 35 μH) with fewer turns than is possible with an air-
core design. Fig. 1-21 indicates the potential savings obtained in
number of turns of wire when coil design is changed from air-
core to toroidal-core inductors. The air-core inductor, if wound
for optimum Q, would take 90 turns of a very small wire (in order
to ﬁt all turns within a 1/4-inch length) to reach 35 μH; however,
the toroidal inductor would only need 8 turns to reach the design
goal. Obviously, this is an extreme case but it serves a useful
purpose and illustrates the point. The toroidal core does require
fewer turns for a given inductance than does an air-core design.
Thus, there is less AC resistance and the Q can be increased
dramatically.
(A) Toroid inductor
(B) Air-core inductor
µi  2500
35 mH
8 turns
¼-inch coil form
35 mH
90 turns
FIG. 1-21.
Turns comparison between inductors for the same inductance.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
The self-shielding properties of a toroid become evident when
Fig. 1-22isexamined. Inatypicalaircoreinductor, themagnetic-
ﬂux lines linking the turns of the inductor take the shape shown in
Fig. 1-22A. The sketch clearly indicates that the air surrounding
the inductor is deﬁnitely part of the magnetic-ﬂux path. Thus,
this inductor tends to radiate the RF signals ﬂowing within. A
toroid, on the other hand (Fig. 1-22B), completely contains the
magnetic ﬂux within the material itself; thus, no radiation occurs.
In actual practice, of course, some radiation will occur but it is
minimized. This characteristic of toroids eliminates the need
for bulky shields surrounding the inductor. The shields not only
tend to reduce available space, but they also reduce the Q of the
inductor that they are shielding.
Inductor
Magnetic Flux
Magnetic Flux
(A) Typical inductor
(B) Toroidal inductor
FIG. 1-22.
Shielding effect of a toroidal inductor.
Core Characteristics
Earlier, we discussed, in general terms, the relative advantages
and disadvantages of using magnetic cores. The following dis-
cussion of typical toroidal-core characteristics will aid you in
specifying the core that you need for your particular application.
Fig. 1-23 is a typical magnetization curve for a magnetic core.
The curve simply indicates the magnetic-ﬂux density (B) that
occurs in the inductor with a speciﬁc magnetic-ﬁeld intensity
(H) applied. As the magnetic-ﬁeld intensity is increased from
zero (by increasing the applied signal voltage), the magnetic-
ﬂux density that links the turns of the inductor increases quite
linearly. The ratio of the magnetic-ﬂux density to the magnetic-
ﬁeld intensity is called the permeability of the material. This has
already been mentioned on numerous occasions.
μ = B/H(webers/ampere-turn)
(Eq. 1-9)
Thus, the permeability of a material is simply a measure of
how well it transforms an electrical excitation into a magnetic
Bsat
Hsat
(ampere turns/meter)
FIG. 1-23.
Magnetization curve for a typical core.
ﬂux. The better it is at this transformation, the higher is its
permeability.
As mentioned previously, initially the magnetization curve is lin-
ear. It is during this linear portion of the curve that permeability is
usually speciﬁed and, thus, it is sometimes called initial perme-
ability (μi) in various core literature. As the electrical excitation
increases, however, a point is reached at which the magnetic-ﬂux
intensitydoesnotcontinuetoincreaseatthesamerateastheexci-
tation and the slope of the curve begins to decrease. Any further
increase in excitation may cause saturation to occur. Hsat is the
excitation point above which no further increase in magnetic-ﬂux
density occurs (Bsat). The incremental permeability above this
point is the same as air. Typically, in RF circuit applications, we
keep the excitation small enough to maintain linear operation.
Bsat varies substantially from core to core, depending upon the
size and shape of the material. Thus, it is necessary to read
and understand the manufacturer’s literature that describes the
particular core you are using. Once Bsat is known for the core,
it is a very simple matter to determine whether or not its use
in a particular circuit application will cause it to saturate. The
in-circuit operational ﬂux density (Bop) of the core is given by
the formula:
Bop =
E × 108
(4.44)f NAe
(Eq. 1-10)
where,
Bop = the magnetic-ﬂux density in gauss,
E = the maximum rms voltage across the inductor in volts,
f = the frequency in hertz,
N = the number of turns,
Ae = the effective cross-sectional area of the core in cm2.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Toroids
Thus, if the calculated Bop for a particular application is less
than the published speciﬁcation for Bsat, then the core will not
saturate and its operation will be somewhat linear.
Another characteristic of magnetic cores that is very important
to understand is that of internal loss. It has previously been men-
tioned that the careless addition of a magnetic core to an air-core
inductor could possibly reduce the Q of the inductor. This con-
cept might seem contrary to what we have studied so far, so let’s
examine it a bit more closely.
The equivalent circuit of an air-core inductor (Fig. 1-15) is
reproduced in Fig. 1-24A for your convenience. The Q of this
inductor is
Q = XL
(Eq. 1-11)
where
XL = ωL,
Rs = the resistance of the windings.
(A) Air core
(B) Magnetic core
FIG. 1-24.
Equivalent circuits for air-core and magnetic-core inductors.
If we add a magnetic core to the inductor, the equivalent circuit
becomes like that shown in Fig. 1-24B. We have added resis-
tance Rp to represent the losses which take place in the core itself.
These losses are in the form of hysteresis. Hysteresis is the power
lost in the core due to the realignment of the magnetic particles
within the material with changes in excitation, and the eddy cur-
rents that ﬂow in the core due to the voltages induced within.
These two types of internal loss, which are inherent to some
degree in every magnetic core and are thus unavoidable, com-
bine to reduce the efﬁciency of the inductor and, thus, increase
its loss. But what about the new Q for the magnetic-core induc-
tor? This question isn’t as easily answered. Remember, when a
magnetic core is inserted into an existing inductor, the value of
the inductance is increased. Therefore, at any given frequency,
its reactance increases proportionally. The question that must be
answered then, in order to determine the new Q of the inductor,
is: By what factors did the inductance and loss increase? Obvi-
ously, if by adding a toroidal core, the inductance were increased
by a factor of two and its total loss was also increased by a factor
of two, the Q would remain unchanged. If, however, the total
coil loss were increased to four times its previous value while
only doubling the inductance, the Q of the inductor would be
reduced by a factor of two.
Now, as if all of this isn’t confusing enough, we must also keep
in mind that the additional loss introduced by the core is not con-
stant, but varies (usually increases) with frequency. Therefore,
the designer must have a complete set of manufacturer’s data
sheets for every core he is working with.
Toroidmanufacturerstypicallypublishdatasheetswhichcontain
all the information needed to design inductors and transformers
withaparticularcore. (Sometypicalspeciﬁcationanddatasheets
are given in Figs. 1-25 and 1-26.) In most cases, however, each
manufacturer presents the information in a unique manner and
care must be taken in order to extract the information that is
neededwithouterror, andinaformthatcanbeusedintheensuing
design process. This is not always as simple as it sounds. Later
in this chapter, we will use the data presented in Figs. 1-25 and
1-26 to design a couple of toroidal inductors so that we may see
some of those differences. Table 1-2 lists some of the commonly
used terms along with their symbols and units.
Powdered Iron vs. Ferrite
In general, there are no hard and fast rules governing the use
of ferrite cores versus powdered-iron cores in RF circuit-design
applications. In many instances, given the same permeability
and type, either core could be used without much change in
performance of the actual circuit. There are, however, special
applications in which one core might outperform another, and it
is those applications which we will address here.
Powdered-iron cores, for instance, can typically handle more RF
power without saturation or damage than the same size ferrite
core. For example, ferrite, if driven with a large amount of RF
power, tends to retain its magnetism permanently. This ruins the
core by changing its permeability permanently. Powdered iron,
on the other hand, if overdriven will eventually return to its initial
permeability (μi). Thus, in any application where high RF power
levels are involved, iron cores might seem to be the best choice.
In general, powdered-iron cores tend to yield higher-Q inductors,
at higher frequencies, than an equivalent size ferrite core. This
is due to the inherent core characteristics of powdered iron cores
which produce much less internal loss than ferrite cores. This
characteristic of powdered iron makes it very useful in narrow-
band or tuned-circuit applications. Table 1-3 lists a few of the
common powdered-iron core materials along with their typical
applications.
At very low frequencies, or in broadband circuits which span
the spectrum from VLF up through VHF, ferrite seems to be the
general choice. This is true because, for a given core size, ferrite
cores have a much higher permeability. The higher permeability
is needed at the low end of the frequency range where, for a given
inductance, fewer windings would be needed with the ferrite
core. This brings up another point. Since ferrite cores, in general,
have a higher permeability than the same size powdered-iron
core, a coil of a given inductance can usually be wound on a
much smaller ferrite core and with fewer turns. Thus, we can
save circuit board area.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
FIG. 1-25.
Typical data sheet – with generic part numbers – for ferrite toroidal cores. (Courtesy of Indiana General)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Toroids
FIG. 1-26.
Data sheet for powdered-iron toroidal cores. (Courtesy Amidon Associates)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
FIG. 1-26.
(Continued)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Toroids
FIG. 1-26.
(Continued)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
FIG. 1-26.
(Continued)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Toroidal Inductor Design
Symbol
Description
Units
Available cross-sectional area. The area
(perpendicular to the direction of the wire)
for winding turns on a particular core.
Effective area of core. The cross-sectional
area that an equivalent gapless core
would have.
Inductive index. This relates the inductance
nH/turn2
to the number of turns for a particular core.
Bsat
Saturation ﬂux density of the core.
gauss
Operating ﬂux density of the core.
gauss
This is with an applied voltage.
Effective length of the ﬂux path.
Initial permeability. This is the effective
numeric
permeability of the core at low excitation
in the linear region.
TABLE 1-2.
Toroidal Core Symbols and Deﬁnitions
TOROIDAL INDUCTOR DESIGN
For a toroidal inductor operating on the linear (nonsaturating)
portion of its magnetization curve, its inductance is given by the
following formula:
L = 0.4πN2μ1Ac × 10−2
(Eq. 1-12)
where
L = the inductance in nanohenries,
N = the number of turns,
μi = initial permeability,
Ac = the cross-sectional area of the core in cm2,
le = the effective length of the core in cm.
In order to make calculations easier, most manufacturers have
combined μi, Ac, le, and other constants for a given core into a
single quantity called the inductance index, AL. The inductance
indexrelatestheinductancetothenumberofturnsforaparticular
core.
This simpliﬁcation reduces Equation 1-12 to:
L = N2AL nanohenries
(Eq. 1-13)
where
L = the inductance in nanohenries,
N = the number of turns,
AL = the inductance index in nanohenries/turn2.
Material
Application/Classiﬁcation
Carbonyl C
A medium-Q powdered-iron material at
150 kHz. A high-cost material for AM tuning
applications and low-frequency IF transformers.
Carbonyl E
The most widely used of all powdered-iron
materials. Offers high-Q and medium
permeability in the 1 MHz to 30 MHz frequency
range. A medium-cost material for use in
IF transformers, antenna coils, and general-
purpose designs.
Carbonyl J
A high-Q powdered-iron material at 40 to
100 MHz, with a medium permeability. A high-
cost material for FM and TV applications.
Carbonyl SF
Similar to carbonyl E, but with a better Q up
through 50 MHz. Costs more than carbonyl E.
Carbonyl TH
A powdered-iron material with a higher Q than
carbonyl E up to 30 MHz, but less than carbonyl
SF. Higher cost than carbonyl E.
Carbonyl W
The highest cost powdered-iron material.
Offers a high Q to 100 MHz, with medium
permeability.
Carbonyl HP
Excellent stability and a good Q for lower
frequency operation—to 50 kHz.
A powdered-iron material.
Carbonyl GS6
For commercial broadcast frequencies. Offers
good stability and a high Q.
IRN-8
A synthetic oxide hydrogen-reduced material
with a good Q from 50 to 150 MHz. Medium
priced for use in FM and TV applications.
TABLE 1-3.
Powdered-Iron Materials
Thus, the number of turns to be wound on a given core for a
speciﬁc inductance is given by:
(Eq. 1-14)
This is shown in Example 1-6.
The Q of the inductor cannot be calculated with the informa-
tion given in Fig. 1-25. If we look at the Xp/N2, Rp/N2 vs.
Frequency curves given for the BBR-7403, however, we can
make a calculated guess. At low frequencies (100 kHz), the Q of
the coil would be approximately 54, where,
Q = Rp/N2
Xp/N2
= Rp
(Eq. 1-15)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
EXAMPLE 1-6
Using the data given in Fig. 1-25, design a toroidal inductor
with an inductance of 50 μH. What is the largest AWG wire
that we could possibly use while still maintaining a single-layer
winding? What is the inductor’s Q at 100 MHz?
Solution
There are numerous possibilities in this particular design since
no constraints were placed on us. Fig. 1-25 is a data sheet for
the Indiana General Series of ferrite toroidal cores. This type of
core would normally be used in broadband or low-Q
transformer applications rather than in narrow-band tuned
circuits. This exercise will reveal why.
The mechanical speciﬁcations for this series of cores indicate a
fairly typical size for toroids used in small-signal RF circuit
design. The largest core for this series is just under a quarter
of an inch in diameter. Since no size constraints were placed
on us in the problem statement, we will use the AA-03 which
has an outside diameter of 0.0230 inch. This will allow us to
use a larger diameter wire to wind the inductor.
The published value for AL for the given core is 495 nH/turn2.
Using Equation 1-14, the number of turns required for this
core is:
50,000 nH
495 nH/turn2
= 10 turns
Note that the inductance of 50 μH was replaced with its
equivalent of 50,000 nH. The next step is to determine the
largest diameter wire that can be used to wind the
transformer while still maintaining a single-layer winding. In
some cases, the data supplied by the manufacturer will
include this type of winding information. Thus, in those cases,
the designer need only look in a table to determine the
maximum wire size that can be used. In our case, this
information was not given, so a simple calculation must be
made. Fig. 1-27 illustrates the geometry of the problem. It is
obvious from the diagram that the inner radius (r1) of the
toroid is the limiting factor in determining the maximum
number of turns for a given wire diameter.
Wire Radius R  d/2
FIG. 1-27.
Toroid coil winding geometry.
The exact maximum diameter wire for a given number of turns
can be found by:
d = 2πr1
N + π
(Eq. 1-15)
where
d = the diameter of the wire in inches,
r1 = the inner radius of the core in inches,
N = the number of turns.
For this example, we obtain the value of r1 from Fig. 1-25
(d2 = 0.120 inch).
d = 2π 0.120
10 + π
= 28.69 × 10−3 inches
= 28.69 mils
As a practical rule of thumb, however, taking into account the
insulation thickness variation among manufacturers, it is best
to add a “fudge factor” and take 90% of the calculated value,
or 25.82 mils. Thus, the largest diameter wire used would be
the next size below 25.82 mils, which is AWG No. 22 wire.
As the frequency increases, resistance Rp decreases while reac-
tance Xp increases. At about 3 MHz, Xp equals Rp and the Q
becomes unity. The Q then falls below unity until about 100 MHz
where resistance Rp begins to increase dramatically and causes
the Q to again pass through unity. Thus, due to losses in the core
itself, the Q of the coil at 100 MHz is probably very close to 1.
Since the Q is so low, this coil would not be a very good choice
for use in a narrow-band tuned circuit. See Example 1-7.
PRACTICAL WINDING HINTS
Fig. 1-28 depicts the correct method for winding a toroid. Using
the technique of Fig. 1-28A, the interwinding capacitance is min-
imized, a good portion of the available winding area is utilized,
and the resonant frequency of the inductor is increased, thus
extending the useful frequency range of the device. Note that by
using the methods shown in Figs. 1-28B and 1-28C, both lead
capacitance and interwinding capacitance will affect the toroid.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Practical Winding Hints
EXAMPLE 1-7
Using the information provided in the data sheet of Fig. 1-26,
design a high-Q (Q > 80), 300 nH, toroidal inductor for use at
100 MHz. Due to PC board space available, the toroid may not
be any larger than 0.3 inch in diameter.
Solution
Fig. 1-26 is an excerpt from an Amidon Associates
iron-powder toroidal-core data sheet. The recommended
operating frequencies for various materials are shown in the
Iron-Powder Material vs. Frequency Range graph. Either
material No. 12 or material No. 10 seems to be well suited for
operation at 100 MHz. Elsewhere on the data sheet, material
No. 12 is listed as IRN-8. (IRN-8 is described in Table 1–3.)
Material No. 10 is not described, so choose material No. 12.
Then, under a heading of Iron-Powder Toroidal Cores, the
data sheet lists the physical dimensions of the toroids along
with the value of AL for each. Note, however, that this
particular company chooses to specify AL in μH/100 turns
rather than μH/100 turns2. The conversion factor between
their value of AL and AL in nH/turn2 is to divide their value of
AL by 10. Thus, the T-80-12 core with an AL of 22 μH/100
turns is equal to 2.2 nH/turn2.
Next, the data sheet lists a set of Q-curves for the cores listed
in the preceding charts. Note that all of the curves shown
indicate Qs that are greater than 80 at 100 MHz.
Choose the largest core available that will ﬁt in the allotted PC
board area. The core you should have chosen is the number
T-25-12, with an outer diameter of 0.255 inch.
AL = 12 μH/100 t
= 1.2 nH/turn2
Therefore, using Equation 1-14, the number of turns
required is
= 15.81
= 16 turns
Finally, the chart of Number of Turns vs. Wire Size and Core
Size on the data sheet clearly indicates that, for a T-25 size
core, the largest size wire we can use to wind this particular
toroid is No. 28 AWG wire.
(B) Incorrect
(C) Incorrect
(A) Correct
30°  40°
Lead
Capacitance
Interwinding
Capacitance
FIG. 1-28.
Practical winding hints.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

This page intentionally left blank 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C H A P T E R 2
RESONANT
Circuits
n this chapter, we will explore the parallel resonant circuit
and its characteristics at radio frequencies. We will examine
the concept of loaded-Q and how it relates to source and
load impedances. We will also see the effects of component
losses and how they affect circuit operation. Finally, we
will investigate some methods of coupling resonant circuits to
increase their selectivity.
SOME DEFINITIONS
The resonant circuit is certainly nothing new in RF circuitry. It
is used in practically every transmitter, receiver, or piece of test
equipment in existence, to selectively pass a certain frequency
or group of frequencies from a source to a load while attenuat-
ing all other frequencies outside of this passband. The perfect
resonant-circuit passband would appear as shown in Fig. 2-1.
Here we have a perfect rectangular-shaped passband with inﬁ-
nite attenuation above and below the frequency band of interest,
while allowing the desired signal to pass undisturbed. The real-
ization of this ﬁlter is, of course, impossible due to the physical
characteristics of the components that make up a ﬁlter. As we
learned in Chapter 1, there is no perfect component and, thus,
there can be no perfect ﬁlter. If we understand the mechanics of
resonant circuits, however, we can certainly tailor an imperfect
circuit to suit our needs just perfectly.
Frequency
Attenuation
0 dB
Passband
FIG. 2-1.
The perfect ﬁlter response.
Fig. 2-2 is a diagram of what a practical ﬁlter response might
resemble. Appropriate deﬁnitions are presented below:
1. Decibel—In radio electronics and telecommunications,
the decibel (dB) is used to describe the ratio between two
measurements of electrical power. It can also be
combined with a sufﬁx to create an absolute unit of
electrical power. For example, it can be combined with
“m” for “milliwatt” to produce the “dBm”. Zero dBm is
one milliwatt, and 1 dBm is one decibel greater than
0 dBm, or about 1.259 mW.
Decibels are used to account for the gains and losses of a
signal from a transmitter to a receiver through some
medium (e.g., free space, wave guides, coax, ﬁber optics,
etc.) using a link budget.
2. Decibel Watts—The decibel watt (dBw) is a unit for the
measurement of the strength of a signal, expressed in
decibels relative to one watt. This absolute measurement
of electric power is used because of its capability to
express both very large and very small values of power in
a short range of number, e.g., 10 watts = 10 dBw, and
1,000,000 W = 60 dBw.
3. Bandwidth—The bandwidth of any resonant circuit is
most commonly deﬁned as being the difference between
the upper and lower frequency ( f2 −f1) of the circuit at
which its amplitude response is 3 dB below the passband
response. It is often called the half-power bandwidth.
Frequency
Attenuation
0 dB
3 dB
Ripple Insertion Loss
Ultimate
Attenuation
60 dB
FIG. 2-2.
A practical ﬁlter response.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
Frequency
60 dB
0 dB
3 dB
Attenuation
f4 f2
FIG. 2-3.
An impossible shape factor.
4. Q—The ratio of the center frequency of the resonant
circuit to its bandwidth is deﬁned as the circuit Q.
f2 −f1
(Eq. 2-1)
This Q should not be confused with component Q which
was deﬁned in Chapter 1. Component Q does have an
effect on circuit Q, but the reverse is not true. Circuit Q is
a measure of the selectivity of a resonant circuit. The
higher its Q, the narrower its bandwidth, the higher is the
selectivity of a resonant circuit.
5. Shape Factor—The shape factor of a resonant circuit is
typically deﬁned as being the ratio of the 60-dB
bandwidth to the 3-dB bandwidth of the resonant circuit.
Thus, if the 60-dB bandwidth ( f4 −f3) were 3 MHz and
the 3-dB bandwidth ( f2 −f1) were 1.5 MHz, then the
shape factor would be:
SF = 3 MHz
1.5 MHz
Shape factor is simply a degree of measure of the
steepness of the skirts. The smaller the number, the
steeper are the response skirts. Notice that our perfect
ﬁlter in Fig. 2-1 has a shape factor of 1, which is the
ultimate. The passband for a ﬁlter with a shape factor
smaller than 1 would have to look similar to the one
shown in Fig. 2-3. Obviously, this is a physical
impossibility.
6. Ultimate Attenuation—Ultimate attenuation, as the name
implies, is the ﬁnal minimum attenuation that the
resonant circuit presents outside of the speciﬁed
passband. A perfect resonant circuit would provide
inﬁnite attenuation outside of its passband. However, due
to component imperfections, inﬁnite attenuation is
inﬁnitely impossible to get. Keep in mind also, that if the
circuit presents response peaks outside of the passband,
as shown in Fig. 2-2, then this of course detracts from the
ultimate attenuation speciﬁcation of that resonant circuit.
7. Insertion Loss—Whenever a component or group of
components is inserted between a generator and its load,
Vout
To High
Impedance
Load
Vout  
(Vin)
RS  ZP
FIG. 2-4.
Voltage division rule.
some of the signal from the generator is absorbed in
those components due to their inherent resistive losses.
Thus, not as much of the transmitted signal is transferred
to the load as when the load is connected directly to the
generator. (I am assuming here that no impedance
matching function is being performed.) The attenuation
that results is called insertion loss and it is a very
important characteristic of resonant circuits. It is usually
expressed in decibels (dB).
8. Ripple—Ripple is a measure of the ﬂatness of the
passband of a resonant circuit and it is also expressed in
decibels. Physically, it is measured in the response
characteristics as the difference between the maximum
attenuation in the passband and the minimum attenuation
in the passband. In Chapter 3, we will actually design
ﬁlters for a speciﬁc passband ripple.
RESONANCE (LOSSLESS COMPONENTS)
In Chapter 1, the concept of resonance was brieﬂy mentioned
when we studied the parasitics associated with individual com-
ponent elements. We will now examine the subject of resonance
in detail. We will determine what causes resonance to occur and
how we can use it to our best advantage.
The voltage division rule (illustrated in Fig. 2-4) states that when-
ever a shunt element of impedance Zp is placed across the output
ofageneratorwithaninternalresistanceRs, themaximumoutput
voltage available from this circuit is
Vout =
Rs + Zp
(Vin)
(Eq. 2-2)
Thus, Vout will always be less than Vin. If Zp is a frequency-
dependent impedance, such as a capacitive or inductive reac-
tance, then Vout will also be frequency dependent and the ratio
of Vout to Vin, which is the gain (or, in this case, loss) of the
circuit, will also be frequency dependent. Let’s take, for exam-
ple, a 25-pF capacitor as the shunt element (Fig. 2-5A) and
plot the function of Vout/Vin in dB versus frequency, where
we have:
Vout
= 20 log10
Rs + XC
(Eq. 2-3)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Resonance (Lossless Components)
50 
25 pF
Vout
To High
Impedance
Load
6 dB/octave
Vout/Vin (dB)
Frequency
(A) Simple circuit
(B) Response curve
FIG. 2-5.
Frequency response of a simple RC (resistor-capacitor)
low-pass ﬁlter.
where
Vout
Vin = the loss in dB,
Rs = the source resistance,
Xc = the reactance of the capacitor.
and, where
XC =
jωC .
The plot of this equation is shown in the graph of Fig. 2-5B.
Notice that the loss of this RC (resistor-capacitor) circuit
increases as the frequency increases; thus, we have formed a
simple low-pass ﬁlter (e.g., a ﬁlter that passes low frequency
signals but attenuates (or reduces the amplitude of) signals with
frequencies higher than the cutoff frequency). Notice, also, that
the attenuation slope eventually settles down to the rate of 6 dB
for every octave (doubling) increase in frequency. This is due to
the single reactive element in the circuit. As we will see later,
this attenuation slope will increase an additional 6 dB for each
signiﬁcant reactive element that we insert into the circuit.
If we now delete the capacitor from the circuit and insert a
0.05-μH inductor in its place, we obtain the circuit of Fig. 2-6A
and the plot of Fig. 2-6B, where we are plotting:
Vout
= 20 log10
Rs + XL
(Eq. 2-4)
where
Vout
Vin = the loss in dB,
Rs = the source resistance,
XL = the reactance of the coil.
0.05 H
Vout
To High
Impedance
Load
6 dB per octave
Vout/Vin (dB)
Frequency
(A) Simple circuit
(B) Response curve
FIG. 2-6.
Simple high-pass ﬁlter.
and, where
XL = jωL.
Here, we have formed a simple high-pass ﬁlter (e.g., a ﬁlter
that passes high frequencies well, but attenuates (or reduces) fre-
quencies lower than the cutoff frequency) with a ﬁnal attenuation
slope of 6 dB/octave.
Thus, through simple calculations involving the basic volt-
age division formula (Equation 2-2), we were able to plot the
frequency response of two separate and opposite reactive com-
ponents. But what happens if we place both the inductor and
capacitor across the generator simultaneously, thereby creating
an LC (inductor-capacitor) circuit?Actually, this case is no more
difﬁcult to analyze than the previous two circuits. In fact, at any
frequency, we can simply apply the basic voltage division rule as
before. The only difference here is that we now have two reactive
components to deal with instead of one and these components
are in parallel (Fig. 2-7). If we make the calculation for all fre-
quencies of interest, we will obtain the plot shown in Fig. 2-8.
Vout
XTOTAL
FIG. 2-7.
Resonant circuit with two reactive components.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
1000
Frequency (MHz)
3 dB BW
Attenuation (dB)
FIG. 2-8.
Frequency response of an LC (inductor–capacitor) resonant
circuit.
The mathematics behind this calculation are as follows:
Vout =
Xtotal
Rs + Xtotal
(Vin)
(Eq. 2-5)
where
Xtotal =
XCXL
XC + XL
and, where
XC =
jωC ,
XL = jωC
Therefore, we have:
Xtotal =
jωC (jωL)
jωC + jωL
jωC + jωL
Multiplythenumeratorandthedenominatorby jωC.(Remember
that j2 = −1.)
Xtotal =
1 + (jωL) (jωC)
1 −ω2LC
Thus, substituting and transposing in Equation 2-5, we have:
Vout
1 −ω2LC
Rs +
1 −ω2LC
Multiplying the numerator and the denominator through by
1 −ω2LC yields:
Vout
(Rs −ω2RsLC) + jωL
Thus, the loss at any frequency may be calculated from the above
equation or, if needed, in dB.
Vout
= 20 log10
(Rs −ω2RsLC) + jωL
where |
| represents the magnitude of the quantity within the
brackets.
Notice, in Fig. 2-8, that as we near the resonant frequency of
the tuned circuit, the slope of the resonance curve increases
to 12 dB/octave. This is due to the fact that we now have two
signiﬁcant reactances present and each one is changing at the
rate of 6 dB/octave and sloping in opposite directions. As we
move away from resonance in either direction, however, the
curve again settles to a 6-dB/octave slope because, again, only
one reactance becomes signiﬁcant. The other reactance presents
a very high impedance to the circuit at these frequencies and
the circuit behaves as if the reactance were no longer there.
Unlike the high-pass or low-pass ﬁlters discussed here, the RLC
circuit (also known as a resonant or tuned circuit) does something
different. As an electrical circuit consisting of a resistor (R),
an inductor (L), and a capacitor (C), connected in series or in
parallel, the RLC circuit has many applications, particularly in
radio and communications engineering. They can be used, for
example, to select a certain narrow range of frequencies from
the total spectrum of ambient radio waves. In this next section,
we will take a closer look at what the RLC circuit can do for the
RF engineer.
LOADED Q
The Q of a resonant circuit was deﬁned earlier to be equal to the
ratio of the center frequency of the circuit to its 3-dB bandwidth
(Equation 2-1). This “circuit Q,” as it was called, is often given
the label loaded Q because it describes the passband character-
istics of the resonant circuit under actual in-circuit or loaded
conditions. The loaded Q of a resonant circuit is dependent upon
three main factors. (These are illustrated in Fig. 2-9.)
1. The source resistance (Rs).
2. The load resistance (RL).
3. The component Q as deﬁned in Chapter 1.
Rloss
FIG. 2-9.
Circuit for loaded-Q calculations.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Loaded Q
1000
Frequency (MHz)
Q  1.1
50-ohm source
Q  22.4
1000-ohm source
Attenuation (dB)
FIG. 2-10.
The effect of Rs and RL on loaded Q.
Effect of Rs and RL on the Loaded Q
Let’s discuss brieﬂy the role that source and load impedances
play in determining the loaded Q of a resonant circuit. This
role is probably best illustrated through an example. In Fig. 2-8,
we plotted a resonance curve for a circuit consisting of
a 50-ohm source, a 0.05-μH lossless inductor, and a 25-pF loss-
less capacitor. The loaded Q of this circuit, as deﬁned by Eq. 2-1
and determined from the graph, is approximately 1.1. Obviously,
this is not a very narrow-band or high-Q design. But now, let’s
replace the 50-ohm source with a 1000-ohm source and again
plot our results using the equation derived in Fig. 2-7 (Equa-
tion 2-5). This new plot is shown in Fig. 2-10. (The resonance
curve for the 50-ohm source circuit is shown with dashed lines
for comparison purposes.) Notice that the Q, or selectivity of the
resonant circuit, has been increased dramatically to about 22.
Thus, by raising the source impedance, we have increased the
Q of our resonant circuit.
Neither of these plots addresses the effect of a load impedance
on the resonance curve. If an external load of some sort were
attached to the resonant circuit, as shown in Fig. 2-11A, the effect
would be to broaden or “de-Q” the response curve to a degree
that depends on the value of the load resistance. The equivalent
circuit, for resonance calculations, is shown in Fig. 2-11B. The
resonant circuit sees an equivalent resistance of Rs in parallel
with RL, as its true load. This total external resistance is, by
deﬁnition, smaller in value than either Rs or RL, and the loaded
Q must decrease. If we put this observation in equation form, it
becomes (assuming lossless components):
Q = Rp
(Eq. 2-6)
where
Rp = the equivalent parallel resistance of Rs and RL,
Xp = either the inductive or capacitive reactance. (They are equal
at resonance.)
(A) Resonant circuit with an external load
(B) Equivalent circuit for Q calculations
RSRL
RS  RL
 RP
FIG. 2-11.
The equivalent parallel impedance across a resonant circuit.
Equation 2-6 illustrates that a decrease in Rp will decrease the
Q of the resonant circuit and an increase in Rp will increase the
circuit Q, and it also illustrates another very important point.
The same effect can be obtained by keeping Rp constant and
varying Xp. Thus, for a given source and load impedance, the
optimum Q of a resonant circuit is obtained when the inductor
is a small value and the capacitor is a large value. Therefore,
in either case, Xp is decreased. This effect is shown using the
circuits in Fig. 2-12 and the characteristics curves in Fig. 2-13.
The circuit designer, therefore, has two approaches he can follow
in designing a resonant circuit with a particular Q (Example 2-1).
1. He can select an optimum value of source and load
impedance.
2. He can select component values of L and C that
optimize Q.
Q ≈ 1.1, f  142.35 MHz
Q ≈ 22.4, f  142.35 MHz
50 nH
(A) Large inductor,
small capacitor
(B) Small inductor,
large capacitor
25 pF
50 
2.5 nH
500 pF
50 
FIG. 2-12.
Effect of Q vs. Xp at 142.35 MHz.
Often there is no real choice in the matter because, in many
instances, the source and load are deﬁned and we have no control
over them. When this occurs, Xp is automatically deﬁned for

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
Frequency
Q  22.4
Attenuation
Q  1.1
FIG. 2-13.
Plot of loaded-Q curves for circuits in Fig. 2-12.
EXAMPLE 2-1
Design a resonant circuit to operate between a source
resistance of 150 ohms and a load resistance of
1000 ohms. The loaded Q must be equal to 20 at the
resonant frequency of 50 MHz. Assume lossless
components and no impedance matching.
Solution
The effective parallel resistance across the resonant circuit
is 150 ohms in parallel with 1000 ohms, or
Rp = 130 ohms
Thus, using Eq. 2-6:
Xp = Rp
= 130
= 6.5 ohms
Xp = ωL =
Therefore, L = 20.7 nH, and C = 489.7 pF.
a given Q and we usually end up with component values that
are impractical at best. Later in this chapter, we will study some
methods of eliminating this problem.
The Effect of Component Q on Loaded Q
Thus far in this chapter, we have assumed that the components
used in the resonant circuits are lossless and, thus, produce no
degradation in loaded Q. In reality, however, such is not the case
and the individual component Q’s must be taken into account. In
alosslessresonantcircuit, theimpedanceseenacrossthecircuit’s
terminals at resonance is inﬁnite. In a practical circuit, however,
due to component losses, there exists some ﬁnite equivalent par-
allel resistance. This is illustrated in Fig. 2-14. The resistance
(Rp) and its associated shunt reactance (Xp) can be found from
RS  Component Losses
FIG. 2-14.
A series-to-parallel transformation.
the following transformation equations:
Rp = (Q2 + 1)Rs
(Eq. 2-7)
where
Rp = the equivalent parallel resistance,
Rs = the series resistance of the component,
Q = Qs which equals Qp which equals the Q of the component.
Xp = Rp
(Eq. 2-8)
If the Q of the component is greater than 10, then,
Rp ≈Q2Rs
(Eq. 2-9)
Xp ≈Xs
(Eq. 2-10)
These transformations are valid at only one frequency because
they involve the component reactance which is frequency depen-
dent (Example 2-2).
Example 2-2 vividly illustrates the potential drastic effects that
can occur if poor-quality (low Q) components are used in highly
selective resonant circuit designs. The net result of this action is
thatweeffectivelyplacealow-valueshuntresistordirectlyacross
the circuit. As was shown earlier, any low-value resistance that
shunts a resonant circuit drastically reduces its loaded Q and,
thus, increases its bandwidth.
In most cases, we only need to involve the Q of the inductor
in loaded-Q calculations. The Q of most capacitors is quite high
over their useful frequency range, and the equivalent shunt resis-
tance they present to the circuit is also quite high and can usually
be neglected. Care must be taken, however, to ensure that this is
indeed the case.
INSERTION LOSS
Insertion loss (deﬁned earlier in this chapter) is another direct
effect of component Q. If inductors and capacitors were perfect
and contained no internal resistive losses, then insertion loss for
LC resonant circuits and ﬁlters would not exist. This is, of course,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Impedance Transformation
EXAMPLE 2-2
Given a 50-nH coil as shown in Fig. 2-15A, compute its Q
at 100 MHz. Then, transform the series circuit of
Fig. 2-15A into the equivalent parallel inductance and
resistance circuit of Fig. 2-15B.
50 nH
55.1 nH
108.7 
10 
(A) Series circuit
(B) Equivalent
parallel circuit
FIG. 2-15.
Example of a series-to-parallel transformation.
Solution
The Q of this coil at 100 MHz is, from Chapter 1,
Q = Xs
= 2π(100 × 106)(50 × 10−9)
= 3.14
Then, since the Q is less than 10, use Equation 2-7 to
ﬁnd Rp.
Rp = (Q2 + 1)Rs
= [(3.14)2 + 1]10
= 108.7 ohms
Next, we ﬁnd Xp using Equation 2-8:
Xp = Rp
= 108.7
3.14
= 34.62
Thus, the parallel inductance becomes:
Lp = Xp
34.62
2π(100 × 106)
= 55.1 nH
These values are shown in the equivalent circuit of
Fig. 2-15B.
(V1  0.5 Vin)
1000 
1000 
1000 
1000 
0.05 H
Q  10
25 pF
Q  ∞
4.5 K
1000 
1000 
V1  0.45 Vin
(0.9 dB loss
compared to
circuit A)
(A) Source connected directly to the load
(B) Insertion of a resonant circuit
(C) Equivalent circuit at resonance
FIG. 2-16.
The effect of component Q on insertion loss.
not the case and, as it turns out, insertion loss is a very critical
parameter in the speciﬁcation of any resonant circuit.
Fig. 2-16 illustrates the effect of inserting a resonant circuit
between a source and its load. In Fig. 2-16A, the source is con-
nected directly to the load. Using the voltage division rule, we
ﬁnd that:
V1 = 0.5 Vin
Fig. 2-16B shows that a resonant circuit has been placed between
the source and the load. Then, Fig. 2-16C illustrates the equiva-
lent circuit at resonance. Notice that the use of an inductor with a
Q of 10 at the resonant frequency creates an effective shunt resis-
tance of 4500 ohms at resonance. This resistance, combined with
RL, produces an 0.9-dB voltage loss at V1 when compared to the
equivalent point in the circuit of Fig. 2-16A.
An insertion loss of 0.9 dB doesn’t sound like much, but it can
add up very quickly if we cascade several resonant circuits. We
will see some very good examples of this later in Chapter 3. For
now, examine the problem given in Example 2-3.
IMPEDANCE TRANSFORMATION
As we have seen in earlier sections of this chapter, low values of
source and load impedance tend to load a given resonant circuit
down and, thus, tend to decrease its loaded Q and increase its
bandwidth. This makes it very difﬁcult to design a simple LC
high-Q resonant circuit for use between two very low values of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
EXAMPLE 2-3
Design a simple parallel resonant circuit to provide a 3-dB
bandwidth of 10 MHz at a center frequency of 100 MHz. The
source and load impedances are each 1000 ohms. Assume the
capacitor to be lossless. The Q of the inductor (that is available
to us) is 85. What is the insertion loss of the network?
Solution
From Equation 2-1, the required loaded Q of the resonant
circuit is:
f2 −f1
= 100 MHz
10 MHz
= 10
To ﬁnd the inductor and capacitor values needed to complete
the design, it is necessary that we know the equivalent shunt
resistance and reactance of the components at resonance.
Thus, from Equation 2-8:
Xp = Rp
where
Xp = the reactance of the inductor and capacitor at resonance,
Rp = the equivalent shunt resistance of the inductor,
Qp = the Q of the inductor.
Thus,
Rp = (85)Xp
(Eq. 2-11)
The loaded Q of the resonant circuit is equal to:
Q = Rtotal
10 = Rtotal
where
Rtotal = the shunt resistance, which equals Rp∥Rs∥RL.
Therefore, we have:
10 =
Rp(500)
Rp + 500
(Eq. 2-12)
We now have two equations and two unknowns (Xp, Rp). If
we substitute Equation 2-11 into Equation 2-12 and solve for
Xp, we get:
Xp = 44.1 ohms
Plugging this value back into Equation 2-11 gives:
Rp = 3.75K
Thus, our component values must be
L = Xp
ω = 70 nH
= 36 pF
The ﬁnal circuit is shown in Fig. 2-17.
3750 
1000 
1000 
70 nH
36 pF
FIG. 2-17.
Resonant circuit design for Example 2-3.
The insertion-loss calculation, at center frequency, is now very
straightforward and can be found by applying the voltage
division rule as follows. Resistance Rp in parallel with resistance
RL is equal to 789.5 ohms. The voltage at VL is, therefore,
VL =
789.5
789.5 + 1000(Vs)
= .44 Vs
The voltage at VL, without the resonant circuit in place, is
equal to 0.5 Vs due to the 1000-ohm load. Thus, we have:
Insertion Loss = 20 log10
0.44 Vs
0.5 Vs
= 1.1 dB
source and load resistance. In fact, even if we were able to come
up with a design on paper, it most likely would be impossible
to build due to the extremely small (or negative) inductor values
that would be required.
One method of getting around this potential design problem
is to make use of one of the impedance transforming circuits
shown in Fig. 2-18. These handy circuits fool the resonant cir-
cuitintoseeingasourceorloadresistancethatismuchlargerthan
what is actually present. For example, an impedance transformer
could present an impedance (R′
s) of 500 ohms to the resonant
circuit, when in reality there is an impedance (Rs) of 50 ohms.
Consequently, by utilizing these transformers, both the Q of
the resonant tank and its selectivity can be increased. In many
cases, these methods can make a previously unworkable prob-
lem workable again, complete with realistic values for the coils
and capacitors involved.
The design equations for each of the transformers are presented
in the following equations and are useful for designs that need

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Impedance Transformation
2000 
50 
47.3 pF
250.6 pF
63.6 nH
(C) Equivalent circuit
(A) Tapped-C circuit
(B) Tapped-L circuit
(D) Final circuit
FIG. 2-18.
Two methods used to perform an impedance transformation.
EXAMPLE 2-4
Design a resonant circuit with a loaded Q of 20 at a center
frequency of 100 MHz that will operate between a source
resistance of 50 ohms and a load resistance of 2000 ohms.
Use the tapped-C approach and assume that inductor Q is
100 at 100 MHz.
Solution
We will use the tapped-C transformer to step the source
resistance up to 2000 ohms to match the load resistance for
optimum power transfer. (Impedance matching will be
covered in detail in Chapter 4.) Thus,
s = 2000 ohms
and from Equation 2-13, we have:
= 5.3
C1 = 5.3C2
(Eq. 2-16)
Proceeding as we did in Example 2-3, we know that for the
inductor:
Qp = Rp
= 100
Therefore,
Rp = 100 Xp
(Eq. 2-17)
We also know that the loaded Q of the resonant circuit is
equal to:
Q = Rtotal
where
Rtotal = the total equivalent shunt resistance,
= R′
s∥Rp∥RL
= 1000∥Rp
and, where we have taken R′
s and RL to each be 2000 ohms, in
parallel. Hence, the loaded Q is
1000Rp
(1000 + Rp)Xp
(Eq. 2-18)
Substituting Equation 2-17 (and the value of the desired
loaded Q) into Equation 2-18, and solving for Xp, yields:
Xp = 40 ohms
And, substituting this result back into Equation 2-17 gives
Rp = 4000 ohms
L = Xp
= 63.6 nH
CT =
= 39.78 pF
We now know what the total capacitance must be to resonate
with the inductor. We also know from Equation 2-16 that
C1 is 5.3 times larger than C2. Thus, if we substitute
Equation 2-16 into Equation 2-14, and solve the equations
simultaneously, we get:
C2 = 47.3 pF
C1 = 250.6 pF
The ﬁnal circuit is shown in Fig. 2-18D.
loadedQ’sthataregreaterthan10(Example2-4). Forthetapped-
C transformer (Fig. 2-18A), we use the formula:
s = Rs
1 + C1
(Eq. 2-13)
The equivalent capacitance (CT) that will resonate with the
inductor is equal to C1 in series with C2, or:
CT =
C1C2
C1 + C2
(Eq. 2-14)
For the tapped-L network of Fig. 2-18B, we use the following
formula:
s = Rs
(Eq. 2-15)
As an exercise, you might want to rework Example 2-4 with-
out the aid of an impedance transformer. You will ﬁnd that the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
inductor value which results is much more difﬁcult to obtain and
control physically because it is so small.
COUPLING OF RESONANT CIRCUITS
In many applications where steep passband skirts and small
shape factors are needed, a single resonant circuit might not
be sufﬁcient. In situations such as this, individual resonant cir-
cuits are often coupled together to produce more attenuation at
certain frequencies than would normally be available with a sin-
gle resonator. The coupling mechanism that is used is generally
chosen speciﬁcally for each application, as each type of cou-
pling has its own peculiar characteristics that must be dealt with.
The most common forms of coupling are: capacitive, inductive,
transformer (mutual), and active (transistor).
Capacitive Coupling
Capacitive coupling is probably the most frequently used method
of linking two or more resonant circuits. This is true mainly
due to the simplicity of the arrangement but another reason is
that it is relatively inexpensive. Fig. 2-19 indicates the circuit
arrangement for a two-resonator capacitively coupled ﬁlter.
FIG. 2-19.
Capacitive coupling.
The value of the capacitor that is used to couple each resonator
cannot be just chosen at random, as Fig. 2-20 indicates. If capac-
itor C12 of Fig. 2-19 is too large, too much coupling occurs and
the frequency response broadens drastically with two response
peaks in the ﬁlter’s passband. If capacitor C12 is too small, not
enough signal energy is passed from one resonant circuit to the
other and the insertion loss can increase to an unacceptable level.
The compromise solution to these two extremes is the point of
critical coupling, where we obtain a reasonable bandwidth and
the lowest possible insertion loss and, consequently, a maximum
transfer of signal power. There are instances in which overcou-
pling or undercoupling might serve a useful purpose in a design,
such as in tailoring a speciﬁc frequency response that a critically
coupled ﬁlter cannot provide. But these applications are gener-
ally left to the multiple resonator ﬁlter. The multiple resonator
ﬁlter is covered in Chapter 3. In this section, we will only con-
cern ourselves with critical coupling as it pertains to resonant
circuit design.
The loaded Q of a critically coupled two-resonator circuit is
approximately equal to 0.707 times the loaded Q of one of its res-
onators. Therefore, the 3-dB bandwidth of a two-resonator cir-
cuit is actually wider than that of one of its resonators. This might
Under Coupling
Frequency
Critical Coupling
Over Coupling
6 dB/octave
18 dB/octave
0 dB
Attenuation
FIG. 2-20.
The effects of various values of capacitive coupling on
passband response.
seem contrary to what we have studied so far, but remember, the
main purpose of the two-resonator passively coupled ﬁlter is not
to provide a narrower 3-dB bandwidth, but to increase the steep-
ness of the stopband skirts and, thus, to reach an ultimate attenua-
tion much faster than a single resonator could. This characteristic
is shown in Fig. 2-21. Notice that the shape factor has decreased
for the two-resonator design. Perhaps one way to get an intuitive
feel for how this occurs is to consider that each resonator is itself
a load for the other resonator, and each decreases the loaded Q
of the other. But as we move away from the passband and into
the stopband, the response tends to fall much more quickly due
to the combined response of each resonator.
The value of the capacitor used to couple two identical resonant
circuits is given by
C12 = C
(Eq. 2-19)
where
C12 = the coupling capacitance.
C = the resonant circuit capacitance.
Q = the loaded Q of a single resonator.
Frequency
Single Resonator
Two Resonators
0 dB
Attenuation
FIG. 2-21.
Selectivity of single- and two-resonator designs.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Coupling of Resonant Circuits
One other important characteristic of a capacitively coupled res-
onant circuit can be seen if we take another look at Fig. 2-20.
Notice that even for the critically coupled case, the response
curve is not symmetric around the center frequency but is
skewed somewhat. The lower frequency portion of the response
plummets down at the rate of 18-dB/octave while the upper
slope decreases at only 6-dB/octave. This can be explained if we
take a look at the equivalent circuit both above and below reso-
nance. Below resonance, we have the circuit of Fig. 2-22A. The
reactance of the two resonant-circuit capacitors (Fig. 2-19) has
increased, andthe reactanceofthetwoinductorshasdecreasedto
the point that only the inductor is seen as a shunt element and the
capacitors can be ignored. This leaves three reactive components
and each contributes 6-dB/octave to the response.
(A) Below resonance
(B) Above resonance
FIG. 2-22.
Equivalent circuit of capacitively coupled resonant circuits.
On the high side of resonance, the equivalent circuit approaches
the conﬁguration of Fig. 2-22B. Here the inductive reactance has
increased above the capacitive reactance to the point where the
inductive reactance can be ignored as a shunt element. We now
have an arrangement of three capacitors that effectively looks
like a single shunt capacitor and yields a slope of 6-dB/octave.
(A) Series inductor
(B) Transformer
Magnetic Coupling
FIG. 2-23.
Inductive coupling.
Inductive Coupling
Two types of inductively coupled resonant circuits are shown
in Fig. 2-23. One type (Fig. 2-23A) uses a series inductor or
coil to transfer energy from the ﬁrst resonator to the next, and
the other type (Fig. 2-23B) uses transformer coupling for the
same purpose. In either case, the frequency response curves
will resemble those of Fig. 2-24 depending on the amount of
coupling. If we compare Fig. 2-24A with Fig. 2-20, we see
that the two are actually mirror images of each other. The
response of die inductively coupled resonator is skewed toward
the higher end of the frequency spectrum, while the capacitively
coupled response is skewed toward the low frequency side. An
examination of the equivalent circuit reveals why. Fig. 2-25A
indicates that below resonance, the capacitors drop out of the
equivalent circuit very quickly because their reactance becomes
much greater than the shunt inductive reactance. This leaves an
arrangement of three inductors which can be thought of as a sin-
gle tapped inductor and which produces a 6-dB/octave rolloff.
Above resonance, the shunt inductors can be ignored for the
same reasons, and you have the circuit of Fig. 2-25B. We now
have three effective elements in the equivalent circuit with each
contributing 6-dB/octave to the response for a combined slope
of 18-dB/octave.
Under Coupling
Frequency
Frequency
(A) Inductive coupling
(B) Transformer coupling
Critical Coupling
Over Coupling
Under Coupling
Critical Coupling
Over Coupling
18 dB/octave
6 dB/octave
0 dB
Attenuation
Attenuation
FIG. 2-24.
The effects of various values of inductive coupling on
passband response.
The mirror-image characteristic of inductively and capacitively
coupled resonant circuits is a very useful concept. This is espe-
cially true in applications that require symmetrical response
curves. For example, suppose that a capacitively coupled design
exhibited too much skew for your application. One very simple

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
(A) Below resonance
(B) Above resonance
FIG. 2-25.
Equivalent circuit of inductively coupled resonant circuits.
way to correct the problem would be to add a “top-L” cou-
pled section to the existing network. The top-L coupling would
attempt to skew the response in the opposite direction and would,
therefore, tend to counteract any skew caused by the capacitive
coupling. The net result is a more symmetric response shape.
The value of the inductor used to couple two identical resonant
circuits can be found by
L12 = QL
(Eq. 2-20)
where
L12 = the inductance of the coupling inductor,
Q = the loaded Q of a single resonator,
L = the resonant circuit inductance.
A little manipulation of Equations 2-19 and 2-20 will reveal
a very interesting point. The reactance of C12 calculated with
Equation 2-19 will equal the reactance of L12 calculated with
Equation 2-20 for the same operating Q and resonant frequency.
The designer now has the option of changing any “top-C” cou-
pled resonator to a top-L design simply by replacing the coupling
capacitor with an inductor of equal reactance at the resonant
frequency. When this is done, the degree of coupling, Q, and
resonant frequency of the design will remain unchanged while
the slope of the stopband skirts will ﬂip-ﬂop from one side to
the other. For obvious reasons, top-L coupled designs work best
in applications where the primary objective is a certain ultimate
attenuation that must be met above the passband. Likewise, top-
C designs are best for meeting ultimate attenuation speciﬁcations
below the passband.
Transformer coupling does not lend itself well to an exact design
procedure because there are so many factors that inﬂuence the
degree of coupling. The geometry of the coils, the spacing
between them, the core materials used, and the shielding, all
have a pronounced effect on the degree of coupling attained in
any design.
Probably the best way to design your own transformer is to use
the old trial-and-error method, but do it in an orderly fashion and
be consistent. It’s a very sad day when one forgets how he got
from point A to point B, especially if point B is an improvement
in the design. Remember:
1. Decreasing the spacing between the primary and
secondary increases the coupling.
2. Increasing the permeability of the magnetic path
increases the coupling.
3. Shielding a transformer decreases its loaded Q and has
the effect of increasing the coupling.
Begin the design by setting the loaded Q of each resonator to
about twice what will be needed in the actual design. Then,
slowly decrease the spacing between the primary and secondary
until the response broadens to the loaded Q that is actually
needed. If that response can’t be met, try changing the geometry
of the windings or the permeability of the magnetic path. Then,
vary the spacing again. Use this as an iterative process to zero-
in on the response that is needed. Granted, this is not an exact
process, but it works and, if documented, can be reproduced.
There are literally thousands of commercially available trans-
formers on the market that just might suit your needs perfectly.
So before the trial-and-error method is put into practice, try a
little research—it just might save a lot of time and money.
Active Coupling
It is possible to achieve very narrow 3-dB bandwidths in cas-
caded resonant circuits through the use of active coupling.Active
coupling, for this purpose, is deﬁned as a transistor, at least
theoretically, which allows signal ﬂow in only one direction
(Fig. 2-26). If each of the tuned circuits is the same and if each
has the same loaded Q, the total loaded Q of the cascaded circuit
is approximately equal to
Qtotal =
21/n −1
(Eq. 2-21)
where
Qtotal = the total Q of the cascaded circuit,
Q = the Q of each individual resonant circuit,
n = the number of resonant circuits.
The ﬁrst step in any design procedure must be to relate the
required Qtotal of the network back to the individual loaded Q
of each resonator. This is done by rearranging Equation 2-21 to
solve for Q.As an example, with n = 4 resonators, and given that
Qtotal of the cascaded circuit must be 50, Equation 2-21 tells us
that the Q of the individual resonator need only be about 22—a
fairly simple and realizable design task.
Active coupling is obviously more expensive than passive cou-
pling due to the added cost of each active device. But, in some

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Summary
FIG. 2-26.
Active coupling.
EXAMPLE 2-5
Design a top-L coupled two-resonator tuned circuit to meet
the following requirements:
1. Center frequency = 75 MHz
2. 3-dB bandwidth = 3.75 MHz
3. Source resistance = 100 ohms
4. Load resistance = 1000 ohms
Assume that inductors are available that have an unloaded Q
of 85 at the frequency of interest. Finally, use a tapped-C
transformer to present an effective source resistance (Rs
′) of
1000 ohms to the ﬁlter.
Solution
The solution to this design problem is not a very difﬁcult one,
but it does involve quite a few separate and distinct
calculations which might tend to make you lose sight of our
goal. For this reason, we will walk through the solution in a
very orderly fashion with a complete explanation of each
calculation.
100 
1000 
FIG. 2-27.
Circuit for Example 2-5.
The circuit we are designing is shown in Fig. 2-27. Let’s begin
with a few deﬁnitions.
Qtotal = the loaded Q of the entire circuit
Qp = the Q of the inductor
QR = the loaded Q of each resonator
From our discussion on coupling and its effects on bandwidth,
we know that
QR = Qtotal
0.707
and,
Qtotal = fe
= 75 MHz
3.75 MHz
= 20
QR =
0.707
= 28.3
Thus, to provide a total loaded Q of 20, it is necessary that the
loaded Q of each resonator be 28.3. For the inductor,
Qp = Rp
= 85
Rp = 85 Xp
(Eq. 2-22)
The loaded Q of each resonant circuit is
QR = Rtotal
(Eq. 2-23)
where,
Rtotal = the total equivalent shunt resistance for each resonator
= Rs
′∥Rp
= RL∥Rp
since both circuits are identical. Remember, we have already
taken into account the loading effect that each resonant
circuit has on the other through the factor 0.707, which was
used at the beginning of the example. Now, we have:
Rtotal =
s + Rp
Continued on next page
applications, there is no real trade-off involved because passive
coupling just might not yield the required loaded Q. Example 2-5
illustrates some of the factors you must deal with.
SUMMARY
This chapter was meant to provide an insight into how resonant
circuits actually perform their function as well as to provide you
with the capability for designing one to operate at a certain value
of loaded Q. In Chapter 3, we will carry our study one step further
to include low-pass, high-pass, and bandpass ﬁlters of various
shapes and sizes.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
EXAMPLE 2-5—Cont
Substituting into Equation 2-23:
QR =
s + Rp)Xp
and,
Xp =
s + Rp)QR
1000Rp
(1000 + Rp)28.3
(Eq. 2-24)
We can now substitute Equation 2-22 into Equation 2-24 and
solve for Xp.
Xp =
(1000)(85Xp)
(1000 + 85Xp)28.3
= 23.57 ohms
and,
Rp = 85Xp
= 2003 ohms
To ﬁnd the component values
L1 = L2 = Xp
= 50 nH
and,
Cs =
90 pF
Now all that remains is to design the tapped-C transformer
and the coupling inductor. From Equation 2-12:
s = Rs
1 + C1
= 2.16
and,
C1 = 2.16C2
(Eq. 2-25)
We know that the total capacitance that must be used to
resonate with the inductor is 90 pF and
Ctotal =
C1C2
C1 + C2
(Eq. 2-26)
Substituting Equation 2-25 into Equation 2-26 and taking
Ctotal to be 90 pF yields:
90 pF = 2.16C2
3.16C2
and,
C2 = 132 pF
C1 = 285 pF
To solve for the coupling inductance from Equation 2-20:
L12 = QRL
= (28.3)(50 nH)
= 1.415 μH
The design is now complete. Notice that the tapped-C
transformer is actually serving a dual purpose. It provides a DC
block between the source and load in addition to its
transformation properties.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C H A P T E R 3
FILTER
Design
ilters occur so frequently in the instrumentation and
communications industries that no book covering the
ﬁeld of RF circuit design could be complete without at
least one chapter devoted to the subject. Indeed, entire
books have been written on the art of ﬁlter design alone,
sothissinglechaptercannotpossiblycoverallaspectsofalltypes
of ﬁlters. But it will familiarize you with the characteristics of
four of the most commonly used ﬁlters and will enable you to
design very quickly and easily a ﬁlter that will meet, or exceed,
most of the common ﬁlter requirements that you will encounter.
We will cover Butterworth, Chebyshev, and Bessel ﬁlters in all
of their common conﬁgurations: low-pass, high-pass, bandpass,
and bandstop. We will learn how to take advantage of the atten-
uation characteristics unique to each type of ﬁlter. Finally, we
will learn how to design some very powerful ﬁlters in as little
as 5 minutes by merely looking through a catalog to choose a
design to suit your needs.
BACKGROUND
In Chapter 2, the concept of resonance was explored and we
determined the effects that component value changes had on
resonant circuit operation. You should now be somewhat famil-
iar with the methods that are used in analyzing passive resonant
circuits to ﬁnd quantities, such as loaded Q, insertion loss, and
bandwidth. You should also be capable of designing one- or
two-resonator circuits for any loaded Q desired (or, at least,
determine why you cannot). Quite a few of the ﬁlter applica-
tions that you will encounter, however, cannot be satisﬁed with
the simple bandpass arrangement given in Chapter 2. There are
occasions when, instead of passing a certain band of frequen-
cies while rejecting frequencies above and below (bandpass), we
would like to attenuate a small band of frequencies while pass-
ing all others. This type of ﬁlter is called, appropriately enough,
a bandstop ﬁlter. Still other requirements call for a low-pass or
high-pass response. The characteristic curves for these responses
are shown in Fig. 3-1. The low-pass ﬁlter will allow all signals
below a certain cutoff frequency to pass while attenuating all
others. A high-pass ﬁlter’s response is the mirror-image of the
low-pass response and attenuates all signals below a certain cut-
off frequency while allowing those above cutoff to pass. These
f3dB
Attenuation
Frequency
(A) Low-pass
f3dB
Attenuation
Frequency
(B) High-pass
f3dB
f3dB
Attenuation
Frequency
FIG. 3-1.
Typical ﬁlter response curves.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
types of response simply cannot be handled very well with the
two-resonator bandpass designs of Chapter 2.
In this chapter, we will use the low-pass ﬁlter as our workhorse,
as all other responses will be derived from it. So let’s take a quick
look at a simple low-pass ﬁlter and examine its characteristics.
Fig. 3-2 is an example of a very simple two-pole, or second-order
low-pass ﬁlter. The order of a ﬁlter is determined by the slope
of the attenuation curve it presents in the stopband. A second-
order ﬁlter is one whose rolloff is a function of the frequency
squared, or 12 dB per octave. A third-order ﬁlter causes a rolloff
that is proportional to frequency cubed, or 18 dB per octave.
Thus, the order of a ﬁlter can be equated with the number of
signiﬁcant reactive elements that it presents to the source as the
signal deviates from the passband.
The circuit of Fig. 3-2 can be analyzed in much the same manner
as was done in Chapter 2. For instance, an examination of the
effects of loaded Q on the response would yield the family of
curves shown in Fig. 3-3. Surprisingly, even this circuit conﬁg-
uration can cause a peak in the response. This is due to the fact
that at some frequency, the inductor and capacitor will become
resonant and, thus, peak the response if the loaded Q is high
enough. The resonant frequency can be determined from
Fr =
(Eq. 3-1)
For low values of loaded Q, however, no response peak will be
noticed.
FIG. 3-2.
A simple low-pass ﬁlter.
Frequency (f/fc)
Attenuation (dB)
Q  0.5
FIG. 3-3.
Typical two-pole ﬁlter response curves.
The loaded Q of this ﬁlter is dependent upon the individual
Q’s of the series leg and the shunt leg where, assuming perfect
components,
Q1 = XL
(Eq. 3-2)
and,
Q2 = RL
(Eq. 3-3)
and the total Q is:
Qtotal =
Q1Q2
Q1 + Q2
(Eq. 3-4)
If the total Q of the circuit is greater than about 0.5, then for
optimum transfer of power from the source to the load, Q1 should
equal Q2. In this case, at the peak frequency, the response will
approach 0-dB insertion loss. If the total Q of the network is
less than about 0.5, there will be no peak in the response and,
for optimum transfer of power, Rs should equal RL. The peaking
of the ﬁlter’s response is commonly called ripple (deﬁned in
Chapter 2) and can vary considerably from one ﬁlter design to the
next depending on the application. As shown, the two-element
ﬁlter exhibits only one response peak at the edge of the passband.
It can be shown that the number of peaks within the passband is
directly related to the number of elements in the ﬁlter by:
Number of Peaks = N −1
where
N = the number of elements.
Thus, the three-element low-pass ﬁlter of Fig. 3-4 should exhibit
two response peaks as shown in Fig. 3-5. This is true only if the
FIG. 3-4.
Three-element low-pass ﬁlter.
0 dB
3 dB
Ripple
Frequency
f3dB
Attenuation
FIG. 3-5.
Typical response of a three-element low-pass ﬁlter.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Normalization and the Low-Pass Prototype
Frequency (f/fc)
Attenuation (dB)
Q  1.25
10.0
FIG. 3-6.
Curves showing frequency response vs. loaded Q for
three-element low-pass ﬁlters.
loaded Q is greater than one. Typical response curves for various
values of loaded Q for the circuit given in Fig. 3-4 are shown in
Fig. 3-6. For all odd-order networks, the response at DC and at
the upper edge of the passband approaches 0 dB with dips in the
response between the two frequencies. All even-order networks
will produce an insertion loss at DC equal to the amount of
passband ripple in dB. Keep in mind, however, that either of
these two networks, if designed for low values of loaded Q, can
be made to exhibit little or no passband ripple. But, as you can
see from Figs. 3-3 and 3-6, the elimination of passband ripple
can be made only at the expense of bandwidth. The smaller the
ripple that is allowed, the wider the bandwidth becomes and,
therefore, selectivity suffers. Optimum ﬂatness in the passband
occurs when the loaded Q of the three-element circuit is equal
to one (1). Any value of loaded Q that is less than one will cause
the response to roll off noticeably even at very low frequencies,
within the deﬁned passband. Thus, not only is the selectivity
poorer but the passband insertion loss is too. In an application
where there is not much signal to begin with, an even further
decrease in signal strength could be disastrous.
Now that we have taken a quick look at two representative low-
pass ﬁlters and their associated responses, let’s discuss ﬁlters in
general:
1. High-Q ﬁlters tend to exhibit a far greater initial slope
toward the stopband than their low-Q counterparts with
the same number of elements. Thus, at any frequency in
the stopband, the attenuation will be greater for a high-Q
ﬁlter than for one with a lower Q. The penalty for this
improvement is the increase in passband ripple that must
occur as a result.
2. Low-Q ﬁlters tend to have the ﬂattest passband response
but their initial attenuation slope at the band edge is
small. Thus, the penalty for the reduced passband ripple
is a decrease in the initial stopband attenuation.
3. As with the resonant circuits discussed in Chapter 2, the
source and load resistors loading a ﬁlter will have a
profound effect on the Q of the ﬁlter and, therefore, on
the passband ripple and shape factor of the ﬁlter. If a
ﬁlter is inserted between two resistance values for which
it was not designed, the performance will suffer to an
extent, depending upon the degree of error in the
terminating impedance values.
4. The ﬁnal attenuation slope of the response is dependent
upon the order of the network. The order of the network
is equal to the number of reactive elements in the
low-pass ﬁlter. Thus, a second-order network
(2 elements) falls off at a ﬁnal attenuation slope of
12 dB per octave, a third-order network (3 elements) at
the rate of 18 dB per octave, and so on, with the addition
of 6 dB per octave per element.
MODERN FILTER DESIGN
Modern ﬁlter design has evolved through the years from a subject
known only to specialists in the ﬁeld (because of the advanced
mathematics involved) to a practical well-organized catalog of
ready-to-use circuits available to anyone with a knowledge of
eighth grade level math. In fact, an average individual with abso-
lutely no prior practical ﬁlter design experience should be able
to sit down, read this chapter, and within 30 minutes be able to
design a practical high-pass, low-pass, bandpass, or bandstop
ﬁlter to his speciﬁcations. It sounds simple and it is—once a few
basic rules are memorized.
The approach we will take in all of the designs in this chap-
ter will be to make use of the myriad of normalized low-pass
prototypes that are now available to the designer. The actual
design procedure is, therefore, nothing more than determining
your requirements and then ﬁnding a ﬁlter in a catalog that satis-
ﬁes these requirements. Each normalized element value is then
scaledtothefrequencyandimpedanceyoudesire, andthentrans-
formed to the type of response (bandpass, high-pass, bandstop)
that you wish. With practice, the procedure becomes very simple
and soon you will be deﬁning and designing ﬁlters.
The concept of normalization may at ﬁrst seem foreign to the
person who is a newcomer to the ﬁeld of ﬁlter design, and the
idea of transforming a low-pass ﬁlter into one that will give one
of the other three types of responses might seem absurd. The best
advice I can give (to anyone not familiar with these practices and
whomightfeelabitskepticalatthispoint)istopresson. Theonly
way to truly realize the beauty and simplicity of this approach
is to try a few actual designs. Once you try a few, you will be
hooked, and any other approach to ﬁlter design will suddenly
seem tedious and unnecessarily complicated.
NORMALIZATION AND THE
LOW-PASS PROTOTYPE
In order to offer a catalog of useful ﬁlter circuits to the elec-
tronic ﬁlter designer, it became necessary to standardize the
presentation of the material. Obviously, in practice, it would

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
be extremely difﬁcult to compare the performance and evalu-
ate the usefulness of two ﬁlter networks if they were operating
under two totally different sets of circumstances. Similarly, the
presentation of any comparative design information for ﬁlters, if
not standardized, would be totally useless. This concept of stan-
dardization or normalization, then, is merely a tool used by ﬁlter
experts to present all ﬁlter design and performance information
in a manner useful to circuit designers. Normalization assures
the designer of the capability of comparing the performance of
any two ﬁlter types when given the same operating conditions.
All of the catalogued ﬁlters in this chapter are low-pass ﬁl-
ters normalized for a cutoff frequency of one radian per second
(0.159 Hz) and for source and load resistors of one ohm. A char-
acteristic response of such a ﬁlter is shown in Fig. 3-7. The circuit
used to generate this response is called the low-pass prototype.
0 dB
Ripple
Attenuation
Frequency (v)
v  1
FIG. 3-7.
Normalized low-pass response.
Obviously, the design of a ﬁlter with such a low cutoff frequency
would require component values much larger than those we are
accustomed to working with; capacitor values would be in farads
rather than microfarads and picofarads, and the inductor values
would be in henries rather than in microhenries and nanohenries.
But once we choose a suitable low-pass prototype from the cata-
log, we can change the impedance level and cutoff frequency of
the ﬁlter to any value we wish through a simple process called
scaling. The net result of this process is a practical ﬁlter design
with realizable component values.
FILTER TYPES
Many of the ﬁlters used today bear the names of the men who
developed them. In this section, we will take a look at three
such ﬁlters and examine their attenuation characteristics. Their
relative merits will be discussed and their low-pass proto-
types presented. The three ﬁlter types discussed will be the
Butterworth, Chebyshev, and Bessel responses.
The Butterworth Response
The Butterworth ﬁlter is a medium-Q ﬁlter that is used in designs
that require the amplitude response of the ﬁlter to be as ﬂat
as possible. The Butterworth response is the ﬂattest passband
response available and contains no ripple. The typical response
of such a ﬁlter might look like that of Fig. 3-8.
0 dB
Attenuation
3 dB
Frequency (v)
v  1
FIG. 3-8.
The Butterworth response.
Since the Butterworth response is only a medium-Q ﬁlter, its
initial attenuation steepness is not as good as some ﬁlters but
it is better than others. This characteristic often causes the
Butterworth response to be called a middle-of-the-road design.
The attenuation of a Butterworth ﬁlter is given by
AdB = 10 log
(Eq. 3-5)
where
ω = the frequency at which the attenuation is desired,
ωc = the cutoff frequency (ω3dB) of the ﬁlter,
n = the number of elements in the ﬁlter.
If Equation 3-5 is evaluated at various frequencies for various
numbers of elements, a family of curves is generated which will
give a very good graphical representation of the attenuation pro-
vided by any order of ﬁlter at any frequency. This information
is illustrated in Fig. 3-9. Thus, from Fig. 3-9, a 5-element (ﬁfth
order) Butterworth ﬁlter will provide an attenuation of approxi-
mately 30 dB at a frequency equal to twice the cutoff frequency
3.0 3.5 4.0
8 9 10
Frequency Ratio (f/fc)
Attenuation (dB)
n  2
FIG. 3-9.
Attenuation characteristics for Butterworth ﬁlters.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Filter Types
of the ﬁlter. Notice here that the frequency axis is normalized
to ω/ωc and the graph begins at the cutoff (−3 dB) point. This
graph is extremely useful as it provides you with a method of
determining, at a glance, the order of a ﬁlter needed to meet a
given attenuation speciﬁcation.A brief example should illustrate
this point (Example 3-1).
EXAMPLE 3-1
How many elements are required to design a Butterworth
ﬁlter with a cutoff frequency of 50 MHz, if the ﬁlter must
provide at least 50 dB of attenuation at 150 MHz?
Solution
The ﬁrst step in the solution is to ﬁnd the ratio of
ω/ωc = f/fc.
= 150 MHz
50 MHz
Thus, at three times the cutoff frequency, the response
must be down by at least 50 dB. Referring to Fig. 3-9, it is
seen very quickly that a minimum of 6 elements is
required to meet this design goal. At an f/f c of 3, a
6-element design would provide approximately 57 dB of
attenuation, while a 5-element design would provide only
about 47 dB, which is not quite good enough.
The element values for a normalized Butterworth low-pass ﬁlter
operating between equal 1-ohm terminations (source and load)
can be found by
Ak = 2 sin (2k −1)π
k = 1, 2, . . . n
(Eq. 3-6)
where
n is the number of elements,
Ak is the kth reactance in the ladder and may be either an
inductor or capacitor.
The term (2k −1)π/2n is in radians. We can use Equation 3-6 to
generate our ﬁrst entry into the catalog of low-pass prototypes
shown in Table 3-1. The placement of each component of the
ﬁlter is shown immediately above and below the table.
The rules for interpreting Butterworth tables are simple. The
schematicshownabovethetableisusedwhenevertheratio Rs/RL
is calculated as the design criteria. The table is read from the
top down. Alternately, when RL/Rs is calculated, the schematic
below the table is used. Then, the element designators in the
table are read from the bottom up. Thus, a four-element low-
pass prototype could appear as shown in Fig. 3-10. Note here
that the element values not given in Table 3-1 are simply left out
1.414
1.414
1.000
2.000
1.000
0.765
1.848
1.848
0.765
0.618
1.618
2.000
1.618
0.618
0.518
1.414
1.932
1.932
1.414
0.518
0.445
1.247
1.802
2.000
1.802
1.247
0.445
TABLE 3-1.
Butterworth Equal Termination Low-Pass Prototype Element
Values (Rs = RL)
1.848
0.765
0.765
1.848
FIG. 3-10.
A four-element Butterworth low-pass prototype circuit.
of the prototype ladder network. The 1-ohm load resistor is then
placed directly across the output of the ﬁlter.
Remember that the cutoff frequency of each ﬁlter is 1 radian per
second, or 0.159 Hz. Each capacitor value given is in farads, and
each inductor value is in henries. The network will later be scaled
to the impedance and frequency that is desired through a simple
multiplication and division process. The component values will
then appear much more realistic.
Occasionally, we have the need to design a ﬁlter that will operate
between two unequal terminations as shown in Fig. 3-11. In this
case, the circuit is normalized for a load resistance of 1 ohm,
while taking what we get for the source resistance. Dividing both
the load and source resistor by 10 will yield a load resistance of
1 ohm and a source resistance of 5 ohms as shown in Fig. 3-12.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
Filter
10 
50 
FIG. 3-11.
Unequal terminations.
Filter
FIG. 3-12.
Normalized unequal terminations.
We can use the normalized terminating resistors to help us ﬁnd
a low-pass prototype circuit.
Table 3-2 is a list of Butterworth low-pass prototype values
for various ratios of source to load impedance (Rs/RL). The
Rs/RL
1.111
1.035
1.835
1.250
0.849
2.121
1.429
0.697
2.439
1.667
0.566
2.828
2.000
0.448
3.346
2.500
0.342
4.095
3.333
0.245
5.313
5.000
0.156
7.707
10.000
0.074
14.814
1.414
0.707
0.900
0.808
1.633
1.599
0.800
0.844
1.384
1.926
0.700
0.915
1.165
2.277
0.600
1.023
0.965
2.702
0.500
1.181
0.779
3.261
0.400
1.425
0.604
4.064
TABLE 3-2A.
Butterworth Low-Pass Prototype Element Values
Rs/RL
0.300
1.838
0.440
5.363
0.200
2.669
0.284
7.910
0.100
5.167
0.138
15.455
1.500
1.333
0.500
1.111
0.466
1.592
1.744
1.469
1.250
0.388
1.695
1.511
1.811
1.429
0.325
1.862
1.291
2.175
1.667
0.269
2.103
1.082
2.613
2.000
0.218
2.452
0.883
3.187
2.500
0.169
2.986
0.691
4.009
3.333
0.124
3.883
0.507
5.338
5.000
0.080
5.684
0.331
7.940
10.000
0.039
11.094
0.162
15.642
1.531
1.577
1.082
0.383
RL/Rs
TABLE 3-2A.
(Continued)
schematic shown above the table is used when Rs/RL is cal-
culated, and the element values are read down from the top of
the table. Alternately, when RL/Rs is calculated, the schematic
below the table is used while reading up from the bottom of the
table to get the element values (Example 3-2).
Obviously, all possible ratios of source to load resistance could
not possibly ﬁt on a chart of this size. This, of course, leaves
the potential problem of not being able to ﬁnd the ratio that you
need for a particular design task. The solution to this dilemma
is to simply choose a ratio that most closely matches the ratio
you need to complete the design. For ratios of 100:1 or so, the
best results are obtained if you assume this value to be so high
for practical purposes as to be inﬁnite. Since, in these instances,
you are only approximating the ratio of source to load resistance,
the ﬁlter derived will only approximate the response that was
originally intended. This is usually not too much of a problem.
The Chebyshev Response
The Chebyshev ﬁlter is a high-Q ﬁlter that is used when: (1) a
steeper initial descent into the stopband is required, and (2) the
passband response is no longer required to be ﬂat. With this type
of requirement, ripple can be allowed in the passband. As more
ripple is introduced, the initial slope at the beginning of the stop-
band is increased and produces a more rectangular attenuation

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Filter Types
Rs/RL
0.900
0.442
1.027
1.910
1.756
1.389
0.800
0.470
0.866
2.061
1.544
1.738
0.700
0.517
0.731
2.285
1.333
2.108
0.600
0.586
0.609
2.600
1.126
2.552
0.500
0.686
0.496
3.051
0.924
3.133
0.400
0.838
0.388
3.736
0.727
3.965
0.300
1.094
0.285
4.884
0.537
5.307
0.200
1.608
0.186
7.185
0.352
7.935
0.100
3.512
0.091
14.095
0.173
15.710
1.545
1.694
1.382
0.894
0.309
1.111
0.289
1.040
1.322
2.054
1.744
1.335
1.250
0.245
1.116
1.126
2.239
1.550
1.688
1.429
0.207
1.236
0.957
2.499
1.346
2.062
1.667
0.173
1.407
0.801
2.858
1.143
2.509
2.000
0.141
1.653
0.654
3.369
0.942
3.094
2.500
0.111
2.028
0.514
4.141
0.745
3.931
3.333
0.082
2.656
0.379
5.433
0.552
5.280
5.000
0.054
3.917
0.248
8.020
0.363
7.922
10.000
0.026
7.705
0.122
15.786
0.179
15.738
1.553
1.759
1.553
1.202
0.758
0.259
0.900
0.299
0.711
1.404
1.489
2.125
1.727
1.296
0.800
0.322
0.606
1.517
1.278
2.334
1.546
1.652
0.700
0.357
0.515
1.688
1.091
2.618
1.350
2.028
0.600
0.408
0.432
1.928
0.917
3.005
1.150
2.477
0.500
0.480
0.354
2.273
0.751
3.553
0.951
3.064
0.400
0.590
0.278
2.795
0.592
4.380
0.754
3.904
0.300
0.775
0.206
3.671
0.437
5.761
0.560
5.258
0.200
1.145
0.135
5.427
0.287
8.526
0.369
7.908
0.100
2.257
0.067
10.700
0.142
16.822
0.182
15.748
1.558
1.799
1.659
1.397
1.055
0.656
0.223
RL/Rs
TABLE 3-2B.
Butterworth Low-Pass Prototype Element Values

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
EXAMPLE 3-2
Find the low-pass prototype value for an n = 4
Butterworth ﬁlter with unequal terminations:
RS = 50 ohms, RL = 100 ohms.
Solution
Normalizing the two terminations for RL = 1 ohm will yield
a value of Rs = 0.5. Reading down from the top of
Table 3-2, for an n = 4 low-pass prototype value, we
see that there is no Rs/RL = 0.5 ratio listed. Our second
choice, then, is to take the value of RL/Rs = 2, and read up
from the bottom of the table while using the schematic
below the table as the form for the low-pass prototype
values. This approach results in the low-pass prototype
circuit of Fig. 3-13.
0.218
2.452
3.187
0.883
FIG. 3-13.
Low-pass prototype circuit for Example 3-2.
3 dB
Chebyshev
Response
Butterworth
Response
Frequency (f/fc)
Attenuation (dB)
FIG. 3-14.
Comparison of three-element Chebyshev and Butterworth
responses.
curve when compared to the rounded Butterworth response. This
comparison is made in Fig. 3-14. Both curves are for n = 3 ﬁlters.
The Chebyshev response shown has 3 dB of passband ripple and
produces a 10-dB improvement in stopband attenuation over the
Butterworth ﬁlter.
Chebyshev Polynomial
+ 18
−112
+ 58
TABLE 3-3.
Chebyshev Polynomials to the Order n
The attenuation of a Chebyshev ﬁlter can be found by making a
few simple but tiresome calculations, and can be expressed as:
AdB = 10 log
1 + ε2C2
(Eq. 3-7)
where
is the Chebyshev polynomial to the order n evaluated
The Chebyshev polynomials for the ﬁrst seven orders are given
in Table 3-3. The parameter ε is given by:
10 RdB/10 −1
(Eq. 3-8)
where
RdB is the passband ripple in decibels.
Note that
is not the same as
. The quantity
can be found by deﬁning another parameter:
B = 1
n cosh−1
(Eq. 3-9)
where
n = the order of the ﬁlter,
ε = the parameter deﬁned in Equation 3-8,
cosh−1 = the inverse hyperbolic cosine of the quantity in
parentheses.
Finally, we have:
cosh B
(Eq. 3-10)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Filter Types
1201.0
2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0
8 9 10
Frequency Ratio (f/fc)
Attenuation (dB)
n  2
FIG. 3-15.
Attenuation characteristics for a Chebyshev ﬁlter with 0.01-dB
ripple
where
= the ratio of the frequency of interest to the cutoff
frequency,
cosh = the hyperbolic cosine.
If your calculator does not have hyperbolic and inverse hyper-
bolic functions, they can be manually determined from the
following relations:
cosh x = 0.5(ex + e−x)
cosh−1 x = ln (x ±
x2 −1)
The preceding equations yield families of attenuation curves,
each classiﬁed according to the amount of ripple allowed in
the passband. Several of these families of curves are shown in
Figs. 3-15 through 3-18, and include 0.01-dB, 0.1-dB, 0.5-dB,
and 1.0-dB ripple. Each curve begins at ω/ωc = 1, which is the
normalized cutoff, or 3-dB frequency. The passband ripple is,
therefore, not shown.
If other families of attenuation curves are needed with different
values of passband ripple, the preceding Chebyshev equations
can be used to derive them. The problem in Example 3-3
illustrates this.
Obviously, performing the calculations of Example 3-3 for
various values of ω/ωc, ripple, and ﬁlter order is a very time-
consuming chore unless a programmable calculator or computer
is available to do most of the work for you.
The low-pass prototype element values corresponding to the
Chebyshev responses of Figs. 3-15 through 3-18 are given in
Tables 3-4 through 3-7. Note that the Chebyshev prototype
values could not be separated into two distinct sets of tables
covering the equal and unequal termination cases, as was done
1201.0
2.5 3.0 3.54.0
8 9 10
Frequency Ratio (f/fc)
Attenuation (dB)
n  2
FIG. 3-16.
Attenuation characteristics for a Chebyshev ﬁlter with 0.1-dB
ripple.
1201.0
2.5 3.0 3.54.0
8 9 10
Frequency Ratio (f/fc)
Attenuation (dB)
n  2
FIG. 3-17.
Attenuation characteristics for a Chebyshev ﬁlter with 0.5-dB
ripple.
2.5 3.0 3.54.0
8 9 10
Frequency Ratio (f/fc)
Attenuation (dB)
n  2
FIG. 3-18.
Attenuation characteristics for a Chebyshev ﬁlter with 1-dB
ripple.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
EXAMPLE 3-3
Find the attenuation of a 4-element, 2.5-dB ripple,
low-pass Chebyshev ﬁlter at ω/ωc = 2.5.
Solution
First evaluate the parameter:
102.5/10 −1
= 0.882
Next, ﬁnd B.
B = 1
cosh−1
0.882
= 0.1279
Then, (ω/ωc)′ is:
= 2.5 cosh.1279
= 2.5204
Finally, we evaluate the fourth order (n = 4) Chebyshev
polynomial at (ω/ωc)′ = 2.52.
= 8(2.5204)4 −8(2.5204)2 + 1
= 273.05
We can now evaluate the ﬁnal equation.
AdB = 10 log10
1 + ε2C2
= 10 log10[1 + (0.882)2(273.05)2]
= 47.63 dB
Thus, at an ω/ωc, of 2.5, you can expect 47.63 dB of
attenuation for this ﬁlter.
RS/RL
1.101
1.347
1.483
1.111
1.247
1.595
1.250
0.943
1.997
TABLE 3-4A.
Chebyshev Low-Pass Element Values for 0.01-dB Ripple.
Rs/RL
1.429
0.759
2.344
1.667
0.609
2.750
2.000
0.479
3.277
2.500
0.363
4.033
3.333
0.259
5.255
5.000
0.164
7.650
10.000
0.078
14.749
1.412
0.742
1.000
1.181
1.821
1.181
0.900
1.092
1.660
1.480
0.800
1.097
1.443
1.806
0.700
1.160
1.228
2.165
0.600
1.274
1.024
2.598
0.500
1.452
0.829
3.164
0.400
1.734
0.645
3.974
0.300
2.216
0.470
5.280
0.200
3.193
0.305
7.834
0.100
6.141
0.148
15.390
1.501
1.433
0.591
1.100
0.950
1.938
1.761
1.046
1.111
0.854
1.946
1.744
1.165
1.250
0.618
2.075
1.542
1.617
1.429
0.495
2.279
1.334
2.008
1.667
0.398
2.571
1.128
2.461
2.000
0.316
2.994
0.926
3.045
2.500
0.242
3.641
0.729
3.875
3.333
0.174
4.727
0.538
5.209
5.000
0.112
6.910
0.352
7.813
10.000
0.054
13.469
0.173
15.510
1.529
1.694
1.312
0.523
RL/Rs
TABLE 3-4A.
(Continued)
for the Butterworth prototypes. This is because the even order
(n = 2, 4, 6, . . .) Chebyshev ﬁlters cannot have equal termina-
tions. The source and load must always be different for proper
operation as shown in the tables.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Rs/RL
1.000
0.977
1.685
2.037
1.685
0.977
0.900
0.880
1.456
2.174
1.641
1.274
0.800
0.877
1.235
2.379
1.499
1.607
0.700
0.926
1.040
2.658
1.323
1.977
0.600
1.019
0.863
3.041
1.135
2.424
0.500
1.166
0.699
3.584
0.942
3.009
0.400
1.398
0.544
4.403
0.749
3.845
0.300
1.797
0.398
5.772
0.557
5.193
0.200
2.604
0.259
8.514
0.368
7.826
0.100
5.041
0.127
16.741
0.182
15.613
1.547
1.795
1.645
1.237
0.488
1.101
0.851
1.796
1.841
2.027
1.631
0.937
1.111
0.760
1.782
1.775
2.094
1.638
1.053
1.250
0.545
1.864
1.489
2.403
1.507
1.504
1.429
0.436
2.038
1.266
2.735
1.332
1.899
1.667
0.351
2.298
1.061
3.167
1.145
2.357
2.000
0.279
2.678
0.867
3.768
0.954
2.948
2.500
0.214
3.261
0.682
4.667
0.761
3.790
3.333
0.155
4.245
0.503
6.163
0.568
5.143
5.000
0.100
6.223
0.330
9.151
0.376
7.785
10.000
0.048
12.171
0.162
18.105
0.187
15.595
1.551
1.847
1.790
1.598
1.190
0.469
1.000
0.913
1.595
2.002
1.870
2.002
1.595
0.913
0.900
0.816
1.362
2.089
1.722
2.202
1.581
1.206
0.800
0.811
1.150
2.262
1.525
2.465
1.464
1.538
0.700
0.857
0.967
2.516
1.323
2.802
1.307
1.910
0.600
0.943
0.803
2.872
1.124
3.250
1.131
2.359
0.500
1.080
0.650
3.382
0.928
3.875
0.947
2.948
0.400
1.297
0.507
4.156
0.735
4.812
0.758
3.790
0.300
1.669
0.372
5.454
0.546
6.370
0.568
5.148
0.200
2.242
0.242
8.057
0.360
9.484
0.378
7.802
0.100
4.701
0.119
15.872
0.178
18.818
0.188
15.652
1.559
1.867
1.866
1.765
1.563
1.161
0.456
RL/Rs
TABLE 3-4B.
Chebyshev Low-Pass Element Values for 0.01-dB Ripple.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
Rs/RL
1.355
1.209
1.638
1.429
0.977
1.982
1.667
0.733
2.489
2.000
0.560
3.054
2.500
0.417
3.827
3.333
0.293
5.050
5.000
0.184
7.426
10.000
0.087
14.433
1.391
0.819
1.000
1.433
1.594
1.433
0.900
1.426
1.494
1.622
0.800
1.451
1.356
1.871
0.700
1.521
1.193
2.190
0.600
1.648
1.017
2.603
0.500
1.853
0.838
3.159
0.400
2.186
0.660
3.968
0.300
2.763
0.486
5.279
0.200
3.942
0.317
7.850
1.100
7.512
0.155
15.466
1.513
1.510
0.716
1.355
0.992
2.148
1.585
1.341
1.429
0.779
2.348
1.429
1.700
1.667
0.576
2.730
1.185
2.243
2.000
0.440
3.227
0.967
2.856
2.500
0.329
3.961
0.760
3.698
3.333
0.233
5.178
0.560
5.030
5.000
0.148
7.607
0.367
7.614
10.000
0.070
14.887
0.180
15.230
1.511
1.768
1.455
0.673
RL/Rs
TABLE 3-5A.
Chebyshev Low-Pass Prototype Element Values for 0.1-dB
Ripple
The rules used for interpreting the Butterworth tables apply here
also. The schematic shown above the table is used, and the
element designators are read down from the top, when the ratio
Rs/RL is calculated as a design criteria. Alternately, with RL/Rs
calculations, use the schematic given below the table and read
the element designators upwards from the bottom of the table.
Example 3-4 is a practice problem for use in understanding the
procedure.
EXAMPLE 3-4
Find the low-pass prototype values for an n = 5, 0.1-dB
ripple, Chebyshev ﬁlter if the source resistance you are
designing for is 50 ohms and the load resistance is
250 ohms.
Solution
Normalization of the source and load resistors yields an
Rs/RL = 0.2. A look at Table 3-5, for a 0.1-dB ripple ﬁlter
with an n = 5 and an Rs/RL = 0.2, yields the circuit values
shown in Fig. 3-19.
0.295
0.366
3.546
9.127
7.889
FIG. 3-19.
Low-pass prototype circuit for Example 3-4.
It should be mentioned here that equations could have been pre-
sented in this section for deriving the element values for the
Chebyshev low-pass prototypes. The equations are extremely
long and tedious, however, and there would be little to be gained
from their presentation.
The Bessel Filter
The initial stopband attenuation of the Bessel ﬁlter is very poor
and can be approximated by:
AdB = 3
(Eq. 3-11)
This expression, however, is not very accurate above an ω/ωc
that is equal to about 2. For values of ω/ωc greater than
2, a straight-line approximation of 6 dB per octave per ele-
ment can be made. This yields the family of curves shown in
Fig. 3-20.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Rs/RL
1.000
1.301
1.556
2.241
1.556
1.301
0.900
1.285
1.433
2.380
1.488
1.488
0.800
1.300
1.282
2.582
1.382
1.738
0.700
1.358
1.117
2.868
1.244
2.062
0.600
1.470
0.947
3.269
1.085
2.484
0.500
1.654
0.778
3.845
0.913
3.055
0.400
1.954
0.612
4.720
0.733
3.886
0.300
2.477
0.451
6.196
0.550
5.237
0.200
3.546
0.295
9.127
0.366
7.889
0.100
6.787
0.115
17.957
0.182
15.745
1.561
1.807
1.766
1.417
0.651
1.355
0.942
2.080
1.659
2.247
1.534
1.277
1.429
0.735
2.249
1.454
2.544
1.405
1.629
1.667
0.542
2.600
1.183
3.064
1.185
2.174
2.000
0.414
3.068
0.958
3.712
0.979
2.794
2.500
0.310
3.765
0.749
4.651
0.778
3.645
3.333
0.220
4.927
0.551
6.195
0.580
4.996
5.000
0.139
7.250
0.361
9.261
0.384
7.618
10.000
0.067
14.220
0.178
18.427
0.190
15.350
1.534
1.884
1.831
1.749
1.394
0.638
1.000
1.262
1.520
2.239
1.680
2.239
1.520
1.262
0.900
1.242
1.395
2.361
1.578
2.397
1.459
1.447
0.800
1.255
1.245
2.548
1.443
2.624
1.362
1.697
0.700
1.310
1.083
2.819
1.283
2.942
1.233
2.021
0.600
1.417
0.917
3.205
1.209
3.384
1.081
2.444
0.500
1.595
0.753
3.764
0.928
4.015
0.914
3.018
0.400
1.885
0.593
4.618
0.742
4.970
0.738
3.855
0.300
2.392
0.437
6.054
0.556
6.569
0.557
5.217
0.200
3.428
0.286
8.937
0.369
9.770
0.372
7.890
0.100
6.570
0.141
17.603
0.184
19.376
0.186
15.813
1.575
1.858
1.921
1.827
1.734
1.379
0.631
RL/Rs
TABLE 3-5B.
Chebyshev Low-Pass Prototype Element Values for 0.1-dB Ripple

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
Rs/RL
1.984
0.983
1.950
2.000
0.909
2.103
2.500
0.564
3.165
3.333
0.375
4.411
5.000
0.228
6.700
10.000
0.105
13.322
1.307
0.975
1.000
1.864
1.280
1.834
0.900
1.918
1.209
2.026
0.800
1.997
1.120
2.237
0.700
2.114
1.015
2.517
0.500
2.557
0.759
3.436
0.400
2.985
0.615
4.242
0.300
3.729
0.463
5.576
0.200
5.254
0.309
8.225
0.100
9.890
0.153
16.118
1.572
1.518
0.932
1.984
0.920
2.586
1.304
1.826
2.000
0.845
2.720
1.238
1.985
2.500
0.516
3.766
0.869
3.121
3.333
0.344
5.120
0.621
4.480
5.000
0.210
7.708
0.400
6.987
10.000
0.098
15.352
0.194
14.262
1.436
1.889
1.521
0.913
RL/Rs
TABLE 3-6A.
Chebyshev Low-Pass Prototype Element Values for 0.5-dB
Ripple
But why would anyone deliberately design a ﬁlter with very
poor initial stopband attenuation characteristics? The Bessel ﬁl-
ter was originally optimized to obtain a maximally ﬂat group
delay or linear phase characteristic in the ﬁlter’s passband. Thus,
selectivity or stopband attenuation is not a primary concern
when dealing with the Bessel ﬁlter. In high- and medium-Q
ﬁlters, such as the Chebyshev and Butterworth ﬁlters, the phase
response is extremely nonlinear over the ﬁlter’s passband. This
Frequency (f/fc)
Attenuation (dB)
FIG. 3-20.
Attenuation characteristics of Bessel ﬁlters.
phase nonlinearity results in distortion of wideband signals due
to the widely varying time delays associated with the different
spectral components of the signal. Bessel ﬁlters, on the other
hand, with their maximally ﬂat (constant) group delay are able
to pass wideband signals with a minimum of distortion, while
still providing some selectivity.
The low-pass prototype element values for the Bessel ﬁlter are
given in Table 3-8. Table 3-8 tabulates the prototype element
values for various ratios of source to load resistance.
FREQUENCY AND IMPEDANCE SCALING
Once you specify the ﬁlter, choose the appropriate attenuation
response, and write down the low-pass prototype values, the
next step is to transform the prototype circuit into a usable ﬁl-
ter. Remember, the cutoff frequency of the prototype circuit is
0.159 Hz (ω = 1 rad/sec), and it operates between a source and
a load resistance that are normalized so that RL = 1 ohm.
The transformation is effected through the following formulas:
2πfcR
(Eq. 3-12)
L = RLn
2πfc
(Eq. 3-13)
where
C = the ﬁnal capacitor value,
L = the ﬁnal inductor value,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Frequency and Impedance Scaling
Rs/RL
1.000
1.807
1.303
2.691
1.303
1.807
0.900
1.854
1.222
2.849
1.238
1.970
0.800
1.926
1.126
3.060
1.157
2.185
0.700
2.035
1.015
3.353
1.058
2.470
0.600
2.200
0.890
3.765
0.942
2.861
0.500
2.457
0.754
4.367
0.810
3.414
0.400
2.870
0.609
5.296
0.664
4.245
0.300
3.588
0.459
6.871
0.508
5.625
0.200
5.064
0.306
10.054
0.343
8.367
0.100
9.556
0.153
19.647
0.173
16.574
1.630
1.740
1.922
1.514
0.903
1.984
0.905
2.577
1.368
2.713
1.299
1.796
2.000
0.830
2.704
1.291
2.872
1.237
1.956
2.500
0.506
3.722
0.890
4.109
0.881
3.103
3.333
0.337
5.055
0.632
5.699
0.635
4.481
5.000
0.206
7.615
0.406
8.732
0.412
7.031
10.000
0.096
15.186
0.197
17.681
0.202
14.433
1.000
1.790
1.296
2.718
1.385
2.718
1.296
1.790
0.900
1.835
1.215
2.869
1.308
2.883
1.234
1.953
0.800
1.905
1.118
3.076
1.215
3.107
1.155
2.168
0.700
2.011
1.007
3.364
1.105
3.416
1.058
2.455
0.600
2.174
0.882
3.772
0.979
3.852
0.944
2.848
0.500
2.428
0.747
4.370
0.838
2.289
0.814
3.405
0.400
2.835
0.604
5.295
0.685
5.470
0.669
4.243
0.300
3.546
0.455
6.867
0.522
7.134
0.513
5.635
0.200
5.007
0.303
10.049
0.352
10.496
0.348
8.404
0.100
9.456
0.151
19.649
0.178
20.631
0.176
16.665
1.646
1.777
2.031
1.789
1.924
1.503
0.895
RL/Rs
TABLE 3-6B.
Chebyshev Low-Pass Prototype Element Values for 0.5-dB Ripple

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
Rs/RL
3.000
0.572
3.132
4.000
0.365
4.600
8.000
0.157
9.658
1.213
1.109
1.000
2.216
1.088
2.216
0.500
4.431
0.817
2.216
0.333
6.647
0.726
2.216
0.250
8.862
0.680
2.216
0.125
17.725
0.612
2.216
1.652
1.460
1.108
3.000
0.653
4.411
0.814
2.535
4.000
0.452
7.083
0.612
2.848
8.000
0.209
17.164
0.428
3.281
1.350
2.010
1.488
1.106
RL/Rs
TABLE 3-7A.
Chebyshev Low-Pass Prototype Element Values for 1.0-dB
Ripple
Cn = a low-pass prototype element value,
Ln = a low-pass prototype element value,
R = the ﬁnal load resistor value,
fc = the ﬁnal cutoff frequency.
The normalized low-pass prototype source resistor must also be
transformed to its ﬁnal value by multiplying it by the ﬁnal value
of the load resistor (Example 3-5). Thus, the ratio of the two
always remains the same.
The process for designing a low-pass ﬁlter is a very simple one
which involves the following procedure:
1. Deﬁne the response you need by specifying the required
attenuation characteristics at selected frequencies.
EXAMPLE 3-5
Scale the low-pass prototype values of Fig. 3-19
(Example 3-4) to a cutoff frequency of 50 MHz and a load
resistance of 250 ohms.
Solution
Use Equations 3-12 and 3-13 to scale each component as
follows:
C1 =
3.546
2π(50 × 106)(250)
= 45 pF
C3 =
9.127
2π(50 × 106)(250)
= 116 pF
C5 =
7.889
2π(50 × 106)(250)
= 100 pF
L2 = (250)(0.295)
2π(50 × 106)
= 235 nH
L4 = (250)(0.366)
2π(50 × 106)
= 291 nH
The source resistance is scaled by multiplying its
normalized value by the ﬁnal value of the load resistor.
Rs(ﬁnal) = 0.2(250)
= 50 ohms
The ﬁnal circuit appears in Fig. 3-21.
50 
250 
235 nH
291 nH
45 pF
116 pF
100 pF
FIG. 3-21.
Low-pass ﬁlter circuit for Example 3-5.
2. Normalize the frequencies of interest by dividing them
by the cutoff frequency of the ﬁlter. This step forces your
data to be in the same form as that of the attenuation
curves of this chapter, where the 3-dB point on the
curve is:
3. Determine the maximum amount of ripple that you can
allow in the passband. Remember, the greater the amount

--- PAGE BREAK ---

High-Pass Filter Design
Rs/RL
1.000
2.207
1.128
3.103
1.128
2.207
0.500
4.414
0.565
4.653
1.128
2.207
0.333
6.622
0.376
6.205
1.128
2.207
0.250
8.829
0.282
7.756
1.128
2.207
0.125
17.657
0.141
13.961
1.128
2.207
1.721
1.645
2.061
1.493
1.103
3.000
0.679
3.873
0.771
4.711
0.969
2.406
4.000
0.481
5.644
0.476
7.351
0.849
2.582
8.000
0.227
12.310
0.198
16.740
0.726
2.800
1.378
2.097
1.690
2.074
1.494
1.102
1.000
2.204
1.131
3.147
1.194
3.147
1.131
2.204
0.500
4.408
0.566
6.293
0.895
3.147
1.131
2.204
0.333
6.612
0.377
9.441
0.796
3.147
1.131
2.204
0.250
8.815
0.283
12.588
0.747
3.147
1.131
2.204
0.125
17.631
0.141
25.175
0.671
3.147
1.131
2.204
1.741
1.677
2.155
1.703
2.079
1.494
1.102
RL/Rs
TABLE 3-7B.
Chebyshev Low-Pass Prototype Element Values for 1.0-dB Ripple
of ripple allowed, the more selective the ﬁlter is. Higher
values of ripple may allow you to eliminate a few
components.
4. Match the normalized attenuation characteristics (Steps 1
and 2) with the attenuation curves provided in this
chapter. Allow yourself a small “fudge-factor” for good
measure. This step reveals the minimum number of
circuit elements that you can get away with–given a
certain ﬁlter type.
5. Find the low-pass prototype values in the tables.
6. Scale all elements to the frequency and impedance of the
ﬁnal design.
Example 3-6 diagrams the process of designing a low-pass ﬁlter
using the preceding steps.
HIGH-PASS FILTER DESIGN
Once you have learned the mechanics of low-pass ﬁlter design,
high-pass design becomes a snap. You can use all of the atten-
uation response curves presented, thus far, for the low-pass
ﬁlters by simply inverting the will produce an attenuation of
about 60 dB at an f /fc of 3 (Fig. 3-16). If you were working
instead with a high-pass ﬁlter of the same size and type, you
could still use Fig. 3-16 to tell you that at an f /fc of 1/3 (or,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
Rs/RL
1.000
0.576
2.148
1.111
0.508
2.310
1.250
0.443
2.510
1.429
0.380
2.764
1.667
0.319
3.099
2.000
0.260
3.565
2.500
0.203
4.258
3.333
0.149
5.405
5.000
0.097
7.688
10.000
0.047
14.510
1.362
0.454
1.000
0.337
0.971
2.203
0.900
0.371
0.865
2.375
0.800
0.412
0.761
2.587
0.700
0.466
0.658
2.858
0.600
0.537
0.558
3.216
0.500
0.635
0.459
3.714
0.400
0.783
0.362
4.457
0.300
1.028
0.267
5.689
0.200
1.518
0.175
8.140
0.100
2.983
0.086
15.470
1.463
0.843
0.293
1.000
0.233
0.673
1.082
2.240
1.111
0.209
0.742
0.967
2.414
1.250
0.184
0.829
0.853
2.630
1.429
0.160
0.941
0.741
2.907
1.667
0.136
1.089
0.630
3.273
2.000
0.112
1.295
0.520
3.782
2.500
0.089
1.604
0.412
4.543
3.333
0.066
2.117
0.306
5.805
5.000
0.043
3.142
0.201
8.319
10.000
0.021
6.209
0.099
15.837
TABLE 3-8A.
Bessel Low-Pass Prototype Element Values
Rs/RL
1.501
0.978
0.613
0.211
RL/Rs
TABLE 3-8A.
(Continued)
EXAMPLE 3-6
Design a low-pass ﬁlter to meet the following
speciﬁcations:
fc = 35 MHz,
Response greater than 60 dB down at 105 MHz,
Maximally ﬂat passband—no ripple,
Rs = 50 ohms,
RL = 500 ohms.
Solution
The need for a maximally ﬂat passband automatically
indicates that the design must be a Butterworth response.
The ﬁrst step in the design process is to normalize
everything. Thus,
= 50
= 0.1
Next, normalize the frequencies of interest so that they
may be found in the graph of Fig. 3-9. Thus, we have:
f60dB
f3dB
= 105 MHz
35 MHz
We next look at Fig. 3-9 and ﬁnd a response that is down
at least 60 dB at a frequency ratio of f/f c = 3. Fig. 3-9
indicates that it will take a minimum of 7 elements to
provide the attenuation speciﬁed. Referring to the catalog
of Butterworth low-pass prototype values given in
Table 3-2 yields the prototype circuit of Fig. 3-22.
Continued on next page

--- PAGE BREAK ---

High-Pass Filter Design
Example 3-6.—Cont
0.100
0.067
0.142
0.182
2.257
10.700
16.822
15.748
1.000
FIG. 3-22. Low-pass prototype circuit for Example 3-6.
We then scale these values using Equations 3-12 and
3-13. The ﬁrst two values are worked out for you.
C1 =
2.257
2π(35 × 106)500
= 21 pF
L2 = (500)(0.067)
2π(35 × 106)
= 152 nH
Similarly,
C3 = 97 pF,
C5 = 153 pF,
C7 = 143 pF,
L4 = 323 nH,
L6 = 414 nH,
RS = 50 ohms,
RL = 500 ohms.
The ﬁnal circuit is shown in Fig. 3-23.
50 
500 
152 nH
21 pF
97 pF
153 pF
143 pF
323 nH
414 nH
FIG. 3-23. Low-pass ﬁlter circuit for Example 3-6.
fc/f = 3) a 5-element, 0.1-dB-ripple Chebyshev high-pass ﬁl-
ter will also produce an attenuation of 60 dB. This is obviously
more convenient than having to refer to more than one set of
curves.
After ﬁnding the response that satisﬁes all of the require-
ments, the next step is to simply refer to the tables of low-pass
prototype values and copy down the prototype values that are
called for. High-pass values for the elements are then obtained
directly from the low-pass prototype values as follows (refer to
Fig. 3-24):
1.821
0.549
(A) Low-pass prototype circuit
(B) Equivalent high-pass prototype circuit
1.181
0.847
0.847
1.181
FIG 3-24.
Low-pass to high-pass ﬁlter transformation.
Simply replace each ﬁlter element with an element of the
opposite type and with a reciprocal value. Thus, L1 of Fig. 3-
24B is equal to 1/C1 of Fig. 3-24A. Likewise, C2 = 1/L2 and
L3 = 1/C3. Stated another way, if the low-pass prototype indi-
cates a capacitor of 1.181 farads, then use an inductor with
a value of 1/1.181 = 0.847 henry, instead, for a high-pass
design. However, the source and load resistors should not be
altered.
The transformation process results in an attenuation character-
istic for the high-pass ﬁlter that is an exact mirror image of the
low-pass attenuation characteristic. The ripple, if there is any,
remains the same and the magnitude of the slope of the stopband
(or passband) skirts remains the same. Example 3-7 illustrates
the design of high-pass ﬁlters.
A closer look at the ﬁlter designed in Example 3-7 reveals that it
is symmetric. Indeed, all ﬁlters given for the equal termination
class are symmetric. The equal termination class of ﬁlter thus
yields a circuit that is easier to design (fewer calculations) and,
in most cases, cheaper to build for a high-volume product, due
to the number of equal valued components.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

RS/RL
1.000
0.174
0.507
0.804
1.111
2.258
0.900
0.193
0.454
0.889
0.995
2.433
0.800
0.215
0.402
0.996
0.879
2.650
0.700
0.245
0.349
1.132
0.764
2.927
0.600
0.284
0.298
1.314
0.651
3.295
0.500
0.338
0.247
1.567
0.538
3.808
0.400
0.419
0.196
1.946
0.427
4.573
0.300
0.555
0.146
2.577
0.317
5.843
0.200
0.825
0.096
3.835
0.210
8.375
0.100
1.635
0.048
7.604
0.104
15.949
1.513
1.023
0.753
0.473
0.162
1.000
0.137
0.400
0.639
0.854
1.113
2.265
1.111
0.122
0.443
0.573
0.946
0.996
2.439
1.250
0.108
0.496
0.508
1.060
0.881
2.655
1.429
0.094
0.564
0.442
1.207
0.767
2.933
1.667
0.080
0.655
0.378
1.402
0.653
3.300
2.000
0.067
0.782
0.313
1.675
0.541
3.812
2.500
0.053
0.973
0.249
2.084
0.429
4.577
3.333
0.040
1.289
0.186
2.763
0.319
5.847
5.000
0.026
1.289
0.123
4.120
0.211
8.378
10.000
0.013
3.815
0.061
8.186
0.105
15.951
1.512
1.033
0.813
0.607
0.379
0.129
1.000
0.111
0.326
0.525
0.702
0.869
1.105
2.266
0.900
0.122
0.292
0.582
0.630
0.963
0.990
2.440
0.800
0.137
0.259
6.652
0.559
1.080
0.875
2.656
0.700
0.156
0.226
0.743
0.487
1.231
0.762
2.932
0.600
0.182
0.193
0.863
0.416
1.431
0.649
3.298
0.500
0.217
0.160
1.032
0.346
1.711
0.537
3.809
0.400
0.270
0.127
1.285
0.276
2.130
0.427
4.572
0.300
0.358
0.095
1.705
0.206
2.828
0.318
5.838
0.200
0.534
0.063
2.545
0.137
4.221
0.210
8.362
0.100
1.061
0.031
5.062
0.068
8.397
0.104
15.917
1.509
1.029
0.835
0.675
0.503
0.311
0.105
RL/Rs
TABLE 3-8B.
Bessel Low-Pass Prototype Element Values

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Bandpass Filter Design
THE DUAL NETWORK
Thus far, we have been referring to the group of low-pass pro-
totype element value tables presented, and then we choose the
schematic that is located either above or below the tables for
the form of the ﬁlter that we are designing, depending on the
value of RL/Rs. Either form of the ﬁlter will produce exactly the
same attenuation, phase, and group-delay characteristics, and
each form is called the dual of the other.
Any ﬁlter network in a ladder arrangement, such as the ones
presented in this chapter, can be changed into its dual form by
application of the following rules:
1. Change all inductors to capacitors, and vice-versa,
without changing element values. Thus, 3 henries
becomes 3 farads.
2. Change all resistances into conductances, and vice-versa,
with the value unchanged. Thus, 3 ohms becomes
3 mhos, or 1
3 ohm.
3. Change all shunt branches to series branches, and vice
versa.
4. Change all elements in series with each other into
elements that are in parallel with each other.
5. Change all voltage sources into current sources, and vice
versa.
Fig. 3-26 shows a ladder network and its dual representation.
Dual networks are convenient, in the case of equal terminations,
if you desire to change the topology of the ﬁlter without changing
the response. It is most often used, as shown in Example 3-7, to
eliminate an unnecessary inductor which might have crept into
the design through some other transformation process. Inductors
are typically more lower-Q devices than capacitors and, there-
fore, exhibit higher losses. These losses tend to cause insertion
loss, in addition to generally degrading the overall performance
of the ﬁlter. The number of inductors in any network should,
therefore, be reduced whenever possible.
A little experimentation with dual networks having unequal ter-
minations will reveal that you can quickly get yourself into
trouble if you are not careful. This is especially true if the load
and source resistance are a design criteria and cannot be changed
to suit the needs of your ﬁlter. Remember, when the dual of a net-
work with unequal terminations is taken, then the terminations
must, by deﬁnition, change value as shown in Fig. 3-26.
BANDPASS FILTER DESIGN
The low-pass prototype circuits and response curves given in this
chapter can also be used in the design of bandpass ﬁlters. This
is done through a simple transformation process similar to what
was done in the high-pass case.
The most difﬁcult task awaiting the designer of a bandpass ﬁlter,
if the design is to be derived from the low-pass prototype, is in
EXAMPLE 3-7
Design an LC high-pass ﬁlter with an fc of 60 MHz and a
minimum attenuation of 40 dB at 30 MHz. The source and
load resistance are equal at 300 ohms. Assume that a
0.5-dB passband ripple is tolerable.
Solution
First, normalize the attenuation requirements so that the
low-pass attenuation curves may be used.
= 30 MHz
60 MHz
= 0.5
Inverting, we get:
f = 2
Now, select a normalized low-pass ﬁlter that offers at least
40-dB attenuation at a ratio of f c/f = 2. Reference to
Fig. 3.17 (attenuation response of 0.5-dB-ripple
Chebyshev ﬁlters) indicates that a normalized n = 5
Chebyshev will provide the needed attenuation. Table 3-6
contains the element values for the corresponding
network. The normalized low-pass prototype circuit is
shown in Fig. 3-25A. Note that the schematic below
Table 3-6B was chosen as the low-pass prototype circuit
rather than the schematic above the table. The reason for
doing this will become obvious after the next step. Keep in
mind, however, that the ratio of Rs/RL is the same as the
ratio of RL/Rs, and is unity. Therefore, it does not matter
which form is used for the prototype circuit.
Next, transform the low-pass circuit to a high-pass
network by replacing each inductor with a capacitor, and
vice versa, using reciprocal element values as shown in
Fig. 3-25B. Note here that, had we begun with the
low-pass prototype circuit shown above Table 3-6B, this
transformation would have yielded a ﬁlter containing
three inductors rather than the two shown in Fig. 3-25B.
The object in any of these ﬁlter designs is to reduce the
number of inductors in the ﬁnal design. More on this later.
The ﬁnal step in the design process is to scale the network
in both impedance and frequency using Equations 3-12
and 3-13. The ﬁrst two calculations are done
for you.
C1 =
1.807
2π(60 × 106)(300)
= 4.9 pF
L2 =
1.303
2π(60 × 106)
= 611 nH

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
Example 3-7.—Cont
The remaining values are:
C3 = 3.3 pF
C5 = 4.9 pF
L4 = 611 nH
1.807
1.303
2.691
1.807
1.303
1/1.807
1/2.691
1/1.807
1/1.303
300  
300  
1/1.303
4.9 pF
3.3 pF
4.9 pF
611 nH
(C) Frequency and impedance-scaled filter circuit
611 nH RL
(A) Normalized low-pass filter circuit
(B) High-pass transformation
FIG. 3-25.
High-pass ﬁlter design for Example 3-7.
The ﬁnal ﬁlter circuit is given in Fig. 3-25C.
specifying the bandpass attenuation characteristics in terms of
the low-pass response curves. A method for doing this is shown
by the curves in Fig. 3-27. As you can see, when a low-pass
design is transformed into a bandpass design, the attenuation
bandwidth ratios remain the same. This means that a low-pass
ﬁlter with a 3-dB cutoff frequency, or a bandwidth of 2 kHz,
would transform into a bandpass ﬁlter with a 3-dB bandwidth of
2 kHz. If the response of the low-pass network were down 30 dB
(A) A reprsentative ladder network
(B) Its dual form
FIG. 3-26.
Duality.
at a frequency or bandwidth of 4 kHz (f /fc = 2), then the response
of the bandpass network would be down 30 dB at a bandwidth of
4 kHz. Thus, the normalized f /fc axis of the low-pass attenuation
curves becomes a ratio of bandwidths rather than frequencies,
30 dB
3 dB
(A) Low-pass prototype response
(B) Bandpass response
30 dB
3 dB
FIG. 3-27.
Low-pass to bandpass transformation bandwidths.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Bandpass Filter Design
such that:
(Eq. 3-14)
where
BW = the bandwidth at the required value of attenuation,
BWc = the 3-dB bandwidth of the bandpass ﬁlter.
Often a bandpass response is not speciﬁed, as in Example 3-8.
Instead, the requirements are often given as attenuation values
at speciﬁed frequencies as shown by the curve in Fig. 3-28. In
this case, you must transform the stated requirements into infor-
mation that takes the form of Equation 3-14. As an example,
consider Fig. 3-28. How do we convert the data that is given into
the bandwidth ratios we need? Before we can answer that, we
have to ﬁnd f3. Use the following method.
EXAMPLE 3-8
Find the Butterworth low-pass prototype circuit which,
when transformed, would satisfy the following bandpass
ﬁlter requirements:
BW3dB = 2 MHz
BW40dB = 6 MHz
Solution
Note that we are not concerned with the center frequency
of the bandpass response just yet. We are only concerned
with the relationship between the above requirements
and the low-pass response curves. Using Equation 3-14,
we have:
= BW40dB
BW3dB
= 6 MHz
2 MHz
Therefore, turn to the Butterworth response curves shown
in Fig. 3-9 and ﬁnd a prototype value that will provide
40 dB of attenuation at an f/f c = 3. The curves indicate a
5-element Butterworth ﬁlter will provide the needed
attenuation.
The frequency response of a bandpass ﬁlter exhibits geometric
symmetry. That is, it is only symmetric when plotted on a loga-
rithmicscale. Thecenterfrequencyofageometricallysymmetric
ﬁlter is given by the formula:
fo =
fafb
(Eq. 3-15)
where fa and fb are any two frequencies (one above and one below
the passband) having equal attenuation. Therefore, the center
3 dB
45 MHz
75 MHz
125 MHz
40 dB
FIG. 3-28.
Typical bandpass speciﬁcations.
FIG. 3-29.
Low-pass to bandpass circuit transformation.
frequency of the response curve shown in Fig. 3-28 must be
fo =
(45)(75) MHz
= 58.1 MHz
We can use Equation 3-15 again to ﬁnd f3.
58.1 =
f3(125)
f3 = 27 MHz
Now that f3 is known, the data of Fig. 3-28 can be put into the
form of Equation 3-14.
BW40dB
BW3dB
= 125 MHz −27 MHz
75 MHz −45 MHz
= 3.27
To ﬁnd a low-pass prototype curve that will satisfy these require-
ments, simply refer to any of the pertinent graphs presented in
this chapter and ﬁnd a response that will provide 40 dB of atten-
uation at an f /fc of 3.27. (A fourth-order or better Butterworth
ﬁlter will do quite nicely.)
The actual transformation from the low-pass to the bandpass con-
ﬁguration is accomplished by resonating each low-pass element
with an element of the opposite type and of the same value. All
shuntelementsofthelow-passprototypecircuitbecomeparallel-
resonant circuits, and all series elements become series-resonant
circuits. This process is illustrated in Fig. 3-30.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
3 dB
50 dB
FIG. 3-30.
Typical band-rejection ﬁlter curves.
To complete the design, the transformed ﬁlter is then frequency-
and impedance-scaled using the following formulas. For the
parallel-resonant branches,
2πRB
(Eq. 3-16)
2πf 2
0 Ln
(Eq. 3-17)
and, for the series-resonant branches,
2πf 2
0 CnR
(Eq. 3-18)
L = RLn
(Eq. 3-19)
where, in all cases,
R = the ﬁnal load impedance,
B = the 3-dB bandwidth of the ﬁnal design,
fo = the geometric center frequency of the ﬁnal design,
Ln = the normalized inductor bandpass element values,
Cn = the normalized capacitor bandpass element values.
Example 3-9 furnishes one ﬁnal example of the procedure for
designing a bandpass ﬁlter.
SUMMARY OF THE BANDPASS
FILTER DESIGN PROCEDURE
1. Transform the bandpass requirements into an equivalent
low-pass requirement using Equation 3-14.
2. Refer to the low-pass attenuation curves provided in order
to ﬁnd a response that meets the requirements of Step 1.
3. Find the corresponding low-pass prototype and write it
down.
4. Transform the low-pass network into a bandpass
conﬁguration.
5. Scale the bandpass conﬁguration in both impedance and
frequency using Equations 3-16 through 3-19.
BAND-REJECTION FILTER DESIGN
Band-rejection ﬁlters are very similar in design approach to the
bandpass ﬁlter of the last section. Only, in this case, we want to
reject a certain group of frequencies as shown by the curves in
Fig. 3-30.
The band-reject ﬁlter lends itself well to the low-pass prototype
design approach using the same procedures as were used for the
bandpassdesign. First, deﬁnethebandstoprequirementsinterms
of the low-pass attenuation curves. This is done by using the
inverse of Equation 3-14. Thus, referring to Fig. 3-30, we have:
BW = f4 −f1
f3 −f2
This sets the attenuation characteristic that is needed and allows
you to read directly off the low-pass attenuation curves by substi-
tuting BWc/BW for fc/f on the normalized frequency axis. Once
the number of elements that are required in the low-pass proto-
type circuit is determined, the low-pass network is transformed
into a band-reject conﬁguration as follows:
Each shunt element in the low-pass prototype circuit is replaced
by a shunt series-resonant circuit, and each series-element is
replaced by a series parallel-resonant circuit.
This is shown in Fig. 3-31. Note that both elements in each of
the resonant circuits have the same normalized value.
FIG. 3-31.
Low-pass to band-reject transformation.
Once the prototype circuit has been transformed into its band-
reject conﬁguration, it is then scaled in impedance and frequency
using the following formulas. For all series-resonant circuits:
2πRB
(Eq. 3-20)
2πf 2
0 Ln
(Eq. 3-21)
For all parallel-resonant circuits:
2πf 2
0 RCn
(Eq. 3-22)
L = RLn
(Eq. 3-23)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Effects of Finite Q
Example 3-9
Design a bandpass ﬁlter with the following requirements:
fo = 75 MHz
Passband Ripple = 1 dB
BW3dB = 7 MHz
Rs = 50 ohms
BW45dB = 35 MHz
RL = 100 ohms
Solution
Using Equation 3-14:
BW45dB
BW3dB
= 35
Substitute this value for f/f c in the low-pass attenuation
curves for the 1-dB-ripple Chebyshev response shown in
Fig. 3-18. This reveals that a 3-element ﬁlter will provide
about 50 dB of attenuation at an f/f c = 5, which is more
than adequate. The corresponding element values for this
ﬁlter can be found in Table 3-7 for an Rs/RL = 0.5 and an
n = 3. This yields the low-pass prototype circuit of
Fig. 3-32A which is transformed into the bandpass
prototype circuit of Fig. 3-32B. Finally, using
Equations 3-16 through 3-19, we obtain the ﬁnal circuit
that is shown in Fig. 3-32C. The calculations follow. Using
Equations 3-16 and 3-17:
C1 =
4.431
2π(100)(7 × 106)
= 1007 pF
L1 =
(100)(7 × 106)
2π(75 × 106)2(4.431)
= 4.47 nH
Using Equations 3-18 and 3-19:
C2 =
7 × 106
2π(75 × 106)2(0.817)100
= 2.4 pF
L2 = (100)(0.817)
2π(7 × 106)
= 1.86 μH
Similarly,
C3 = 504 pF
L3 = 8.93 nH
where, in all cases,
B = the 3-dB bandwidth,
R = the ﬁnal load resistance,
fo = the geometric center frequency,
Cn = the normalized capacitor band-reject element value,
Ln = the normalized inductor band-reject element value.
(B) Bandpass transformation
0.500
0.817
0.817
2.216
2.216
4.431
4.431
1.000
(C) Final circuit with frequency and impedance scaled
2.4 pF 1.86 mH
504 pF
8.93 nH
50 
100 
1007 pF
4.47 nH
0.500
0.817
2.216
(A) Low-pass prototype circuit
4.431
1.000
FIG. 3-32.
Bandpass ﬁlter design for Example 3-9.
THE EFFECTS OF FINITE Q
Thus far in this chapter, we have assumed the inductors and
capacitors used in the designs to be lossless. Indeed, all of
the response curves presented in this chapter are based on that
assumption. But we know from our previous study of Chapters 1
and 2 that even though capacitors can be approximated as hav-
ing inﬁnite Q, inductors cannot, and the effects of the ﬁnite-Q
inductor must be taken into account in any ﬁlter design.
The use of ﬁnite element Q in a design intended for loss-
less elements causes the following unwanted effects (refer to
Fig. 3-33):
1. Insertion loss of the ﬁlter is increased whereas the ﬁnal
stopband attenuation does not change. The relative
attenuation between the two is decreased.
2. At frequencies in the vicinity of cutoff (fc), the response
becomes more rounded and usually results in an
attenuation greater than the 3 dB that was originally
intended.
3. Ripple that was designed into the passband will be
reduced. If the element Q is sufﬁciently low, ripple will
be totally eliminated.
4. For band-reject ﬁlters, the attenuation in the stop-band
becomes ﬁnite. This, coupled with an increase in
passband insertion loss, decreases the relative
attenuation signiﬁcantly.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
Insertion Loss
Ideal
Low Q
FIG. 3-33.
The effect of ﬁnite-Q elements on ﬁlter response.
Regardless of the gloomy predictions outlined above, however,
it is possible to design ﬁlters, using the approach outlined in this
chapter, that very closely resemble the ideal response of each
network. The key is to use the highest-Q inductors available for
the given task. Table 3-9 outlines the recommended minimum
element-Q requirements for the ﬁlters presented in this chapter.
Keep in mind, however, that any time a low-Q component is
used, the actual attenuation response of the network strays from
Filter Type
Minimum Element Q Required
Bessel
Butterworth
0.01-dB Chebyshev
0.1-dB Chebyshev
0.5-dB Chebyshev
1-dB Chebyshev
TABLE 3-9.
Filter Elemental-Q Requirements
the ideal response to a degree depending upon the element Q.
It is, therefore, highly recommended that you make it a habit to
use only the highest-Q components available.
The insertion loss of the ﬁlters presented in this chapter can be
calculated in the same manner as was used in Chapter 2. Simply
replace each reactive element with resistor values corresponding
to the Q of the element and, then, exercise the voltage division
rule from source to load.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C H A P T E R 4
IMPEDANCE
Matching
mpedance matching is often necessary in the design of RF
circuitry to provide the maximum possible transfer of power
between a source and its load. Probably the most vivid
example of the need for such a transfer of power occurs
in the front end of any sensitive receiver. Obviously, any
unnecessary loss in a circuit that is already carrying extremely
small signal levels simply cannot be tolerated. Therefore, in most
instances, extreme care is taken during the initial design of such
a front end to make sure that each device in the chain is matched
to its load.
In this chapter, then, we will study several methods of matching a
given source to a given load. This will be done numerically, with
the aid of the Smith Chart, and by using software design tools.
In all cases, exact step-by-step procedures will be presented,
making any calculations as painless as possible.
RS  1Ω
(A) Circuit
(B) Graph
FIG. 4-1.
The power theorem.
Proof that Pout MAX occurs when RL = Rs, in the circuit of
Fig. 4-1A, is given by the formula:
V 1 =
RS + RL
(VS)
Set Vs = 1 and Rs = 1, for convenience. Therefore,
V1 =
1 + RL
Then, the power into RL is:
P1 = V2
1 + RL
(1 + RL)2
If you plot P1 versus RL, as in the preceding equation, the
result is shown by the curve of the graph in Fig. 4-1B.
BACKGROUND
There is a well-known theorem which states that, for DC cir-
cuits, maximum power will be transferred from a source to its
load if the load resistance equals the source resistance. A sim-
ple proof of this theorem is given by the calculations and the
sketches shown in Fig. 4-1. In the calculation, for convenience,
the source is normalized for a resistance of one ohm and a source
voltage of one volt.
In dealing with AC or time-varying waveforms, however, that
same theorem states that the maximum transfer of power, from
a source to its load, occurs when the load impedance (ZL) is
equal to the complex conjugate of the source impedance. Com-
plex conjugate simply refers to a complex impedance having the
same real part with an opposite reactance. Thus, if the source

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
jXL
FIG. 4-2.
Source impedance driving its complex conjugate and the
resulting equivalent circuit.
impedance were Zs = R + jX, then its complex conjugate would
be Zs = R −jX.
If you followed the mathematics associated with Fig. 4-1, then it
should be obvious why maximum transfer of power does occur
when the load impedance is the complex conjugate of the source.
This is shown schematically in Fig. 4-2. The source (Zs), with
a series reactive component of +jX (an inductor), is driving its
complex conjugate load impedance consisting of a −jX reac-
tance (capacitor) in series with RL. The +jX component of the
source and the −jX component of the load are in series and, thus,
cancel each other, leaving only Rs and RL, which are equal by
deﬁnition. Since Rs and RL are equal, maximum power transfer
will occur. So when we speak of a source driving its complex
conjugate, we are simply referring to a condition in which any
source reactance is resonated with an equal and opposite load
reactance, thus leaving only equal resistor values for the source
and the load terminations.
The primary objective in any impedance matching scheme, then,
is to force a load impedance to “look like” the complex con-
jugate of the source impedance so that maximum power may
be transferred to the load. This is shown in Fig. 4-3 where a
load impedance of 2 −j6 ohms is transformed by the impedance
matching network to a value of 5 + j10 ohms. Therefore, the
source “sees” a load impedance of 5 + j10 ohms, which just
happens to be its complex conjugate. It should be noted here
that because we are dealing with reactances, which are fre-
quency dependent, the perfect impedance match can occur only
at one frequency. That is the frequency at which the +jX compo-
nent exactly equals the −jX component and, thus, cancellation
or resonance occurs. At all other frequencies removed from
the matching center frequency, the impedance match becomes
progressively worse and eventually nonexistent. This can be a
problem in broadband circuits where we would ideally like to
provide a perfect match everywhere within the broad passband.
There are methods, however, of increasing the bandwidth of the
match and a few of these methods will be presented later in this
chapter.
There are an inﬁnite number of possible networks that could be
used to perform the impedance matching function of Fig. 4-3.
Something as simple as a 2-element LC network or as elaborate
as a 7-element ﬁlter, depending on the application, would work
j10
Impedance
Matching
Network
5j10
FIG. 4-3.
Impedance transformation.
(A) Low-pas
(B) Low-pass
(C) High-pass
(D) High-pass
FIG. 4-4.
The L network.
equally well. The remainder of this chapter is devoted to provid-
ing you with an insight into a few of those inﬁnite possibilities.
After studying this chapter, you should be able to match almost
any two complex loads with a minimum of effort.
THE L NETWORK
Probably the simplest and most widely used matching circuit
is the L network shown in Fig. 4-4. This circuit receives its
name because of the component orientation, which resembles
the shape of an L. As shown in the sketches, there are four pos-
sible arrangements of the two L and C components. Two of the
arrangements (Figs. 4-4A and 4-4B) are in a low-pass conﬁgura-
tion while the other two (Figs. 4-4C and 4-4D) are in a high-pass
conﬁguration. Both of these circuits should be recognized from
Chapter 3.
Before we introduce equations which can be used to design the
matching networks of Fig. 4-4, let’s ﬁrst analyze an existing
matching network so that we can understand exactly how the
impedance match occurs. Once this analysis is made, a little
of the “black magic” surrounding impedance matching should
subside.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The L Network
j300
j333
100 
1000 
FIG. 4-5.
Simple impedance-match network between a 100-ohm source
and a 1000-ohm load.
j333
1000 
FIG. 4-6.
Impedance looking into the parallel combination of RL and Xc.
Fig. 4-5 shows a simple L network impedance-matching circuit
between a 100-ohm source and a 1000-ohm load. Without the
impedance-matching network installed, and with the 100-ohm
source driving the 1000-ohm load directly, about 4.8 dB of the
available power from the source would be lost. Thus, roughly
one-third of the signal available from the source is gone before
we even get started. The impedance-matching network elim-
inates this loss and allows for maximum power transfer to the
load. This is done by forcing the 100-ohm source to see 100 ohms
when it looks into the impedance-matching network. But how?
If you analyze Fig. 4-5, the simplicity of how the match occurs
will amaze you. Take a look at Fig. 4-6. The ﬁrst step in the
analysis is to determine what the load impedance actually looks
like when the −j333-ohm capacitor is placed across the 1000-
ohm load resistor. This is easily calculated by:
XcRL
Xc + RL
= −j333(1000)
−j333 + 1000
= 315∠−71.58◦
= 100 −j300 ohms
Thus, the parallel combination of the −j333-ohm capacitor and
the 1000-ohm resistor looks like an impedance of 100 −j300
ohms. This is a series combination of a 100-ohm resistor and
a −j300-ohm capacitor as shown in Fig. 4-7. Indeed, if you
hooked a signal generator up to circuits that are similar to Figs.
4-6 and 4-7, you would not be able to tell the difference between
the two as they would exhibit the same characteristics (except at
DC, obviously).
j300 
100 
FIG. 4-7.
Equivalent circuit of Fig. 4-6.
j300 
j300
100 
100 
FIG. 4-8.
Completing the match.
Nowthatwehaveanapparent series100 −j300-ohmimpedance
for a load, all we must do to complete the impedance match to
the 100-ohm source is to add an equal and opposite (+j300 ohm)
reactance in series with the network of Fig. 4-7. The addition of
the +j300-ohm inductor causes cancellation of the −j300-ohm
capacitor leaving only an apparent 100-ohm load resistor. This
is shown in Fig. 4-8. Keep in mind here that the actual network
topology of Fig. 4-5 has not changed. All we have done is to
analyze small portions of the network so that we can understand
the function of each component.
To summarize then, the function of the shunt component of the
impedance-matching network is to transform a larger impedance
down to a smaller value with a real part equal to the real part of the
other terminating impedance (in our case, the 100-ohm source).
The series impedance-matching element then resonates with or
cancels any reactive component present, thus leaving the source
driving an apparently equal load for optimum power transfer. So
you see, the impedance match isn’t “black magic” at all but can
be completely explained every step of the way.
Now, back to the design of the impedance-matching networks
of Fig. 4-4. These circuits can be very easily designed using the
following equations:
Qs = Qp =
(Eq. 4-1)
Qs = Xs
(Eq. 4-2)
Qp = Rp
(Eq. 4-3)
where, as shown in Fig. 4-9:
Qs = the Q of the series leg,
Qp = the Q of the shunt leg,
Rp = the shunt resistance,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
QS  XS/RS
QS  QP 
QP  RP /XP
FIG. 4-9.
Summary of the L-network design.
Xp = the shunt reactance,
Rs = the series resistance,
Xs = the series reactance.
The quantities Xp and Xs may be either capacitive or inductive
reactance but each must be of the opposite type. Once Xp is
chosen as a capacitor, for example, Xs must be an inductor, and
vice versa. Example 4-1 illustrates the procedure.
DEALING WITH COMPLEX LOADS
ThedesignofExample4-1wasusedforthesimplecaseofmatch-
ing two real impedances (pure resistances). It is very rare when
such an occurrence actually exists in the real world. Transistor
input and output impedances are almost always complex; that
is they contain both resistive and reactive components (R ± jX).
Transmission lines, mixers, antennas, and most other sources
and loads are no different in that respect. Most will always have
some reactive component which must be dealt with. It is, there-
fore, necessary to know how to handle these stray reactances
and, in some instances, to actually put them to work for you.
There
basic
approaches
handling
complex
impedances:
1. Absorption—To actually absorb any stray reactances into
the impedance-matching network itself. This can be done
through prudent placement of each matching element
such that element capacitors are placed in parallel with
stray capacitances, and element inductors are placed in
series with any stray inductances. The stray component
values are then subtracted from the calculated element
values, leaving new element values (C′, L′), which are
smaller than the calculated element values.
2. Resonance—To resonate any stray reactance with an
equal and opposite reactance at the frequency of interest.
Once this is done the matching network design can
proceed as shown for two pure resistances in Example 4-1.
Of course,
it is possible to use both of the approaches
outlined above at the same time. In fact, the majority of
EXAMPLE 4-1
Design a circuit to match a 100-ohm source to a
1000-ohm load at 100 MHz. Assume that a DC voltage
must also be transferred from the source to the load.
Solution
The need for a DC path between the source and load
dictates the need for an inductor in the series leg, as
shown in Fig. 4-4A. From Equation 4-1, we have:
Qs = Qp =
1000
100 −1
From Equation 4-2, we get:
Xs = QsRs
= (3)(100)
= 300 ohms (inductive)
Then, from Equation 4-3,
Xp = Rp
= 1000
= 333 ohms (capacitive)
Thus, the component values at 100 MHz are:
L = Xs
2π(100 × 106)
= 477 nH
2π(100 × 106) (333)
= 4.8 pF
This yields the circuit shown in Fig. 4-10. Notice that what
you have done is to design the circuit that was previously
given in Fig. 4-5 and then analyzed.
100 
1000 
477 nH
4.8 pF
FIG. 4-10.
Final circuit for Example 4-1.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Three-Element Matching
impedance-matching designs probably do utilize a little of both.
Let’s take a look at two simple examples to help clarify matters.
Notice that nowhere in Example 4-2 was a conjugate match even
mentioned. However, you can rest assured that if you perform the
simple analysis outlined in the previous section of this chapter,
the impedance looking into the matching network, as seen by the
source, will be 100 −j126 ohms, which is indeed the complex
conjugate of 100 + j126 ohms.
Obviously, if the stray element values are larger than the cal-
culated element values, absorption cannot take place. If, for
instance, the stray capacitance of Fig. 4-11 were 20 pF, we
could not have added a shunt element capacitor to give us the
total needed shunt capacitance of 4.8 pF. In a situation such as
this, when absorption is not possible, the concept of resonance
coupled with absorption will often do the trick.
Examples 4-2 and 4-3 detail some very important concepts in
the design of impedance-matching networks. With a little plan-
ning and preparation, the design of simple impedance-matching
networks between complex loads becomes a simple number-
crunching task using elementary algebra. Any stray reactances
present in the source and load can usually be absorbed in the
matching network (Example 4-2), or they can be resonated with
an equal and opposite reactance, which is then absorbed into the
network (Example 4-3).
THREE-ELEMENT MATCHING
Equation 4-1 reveals a potential disadvantage of the 2-element L
networks described in the previous sections. It is a fact that once
Rs and Rp, or the source and load impedance, are determined, the
Q of the network is deﬁned. In other words, with the L network,
the designer does not have a choice of circuit Q and simply must
take what he gets. This is, of course, usually the case because
the source and load impedance are typically given in any design
and, thus, Rp and Rs cannot be changed.
The lack of circuit-Q versatility in a matching network can
be a hindrance, however, especially if a narrow bandwidth is
required. The 3-element network overcomes this disadvantage
and can be used for narrow-band high-Q applications. Further-
more, the designer can select any practical circuit Q that he
wishes as long as it is greater than that Q which is possible with
the L-matching network alone. In other words, the circuit Q
established with an L-matching network is the minimum circuit
Q available in the 3-element matching arrangement.
The 3-element network (shown in Fig. 4-17) is called a Pi
network because it closely resembles the Greek letter π. Its com-
panion network (shown in Fig. 4-18) is called a T network for
equally obvious reasons.
The Pi Network
The Pi network can best be described as two “back-to-back”
L networks that are both conﬁgured to match the load and
the source to an invisible or “virtual” resistance located at
EXAMPLE 4-2
Use the absorption approach to match the source and
load shown in Fig. 4-11 (at 100 MHz).
Solution
j126
100 
Z Match
2 pF
1000 
100  j126
FIG. 4-11.
Complex source and load circuit for Example 4-2.
The ﬁrst step in the design process is to totally ignore the
reactances and simply match the 100-ohm real part of the
source to the 1000-ohm real part of the load (at
100 MHz). Keep in mind that you would like to use a
matching network that will place element inductances in
series with stray inductance and element capacitances in
parallel with stray capacitances. Thus, conveniently, the
network circuit shown in Fig. 4-4A is again chosen for the
design and, again, Example 4-1 is used to provide the
details of the procedure. Thus, the calculated values for
the network, if we ignore stray reactances, are shown in
the circuit of Fig. 4-10. But, since the stray reactances
really do exist, the design is not yet ﬁnished as we must
now somehow absorb the stray reactances into the
matching network. This is done as follows. At the load
end, we need 4.8 pF of capacitance for the matching
network. We already have a stray 2 pF available at the
load, so why not use it? Thus, if we use a 2.8-pF element
capacitor, the total shunt capacitance becomes 4.8 pF, the
design value. Similarly, at the source, the matching
network calls for a series 477-nH inductor. We already
have a +j126-ohm, or 200-nH, inductor available in the
source. Thus, if we use an actual element inductance of
477 nH −200 nH = 277 nH, then the total series
inductance will be 477 nH, which is the calculated design
value. The ﬁnal design circuit is shown in Fig. 4-12.
100 
200 nH
277 nH
2.8 pF
2 pF
1000 
100  j126
FIG. 4-12.
Final design circuit for Example 4-2.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
EXAMPLE 4-3
Design an impedance matching network that will block the
ﬂow of DC from the source to the load in Fig. 4-13. The
frequency of operation is 75 MHz. Try the resonant approach.
Z Match
50 
600 
40 pF
FIG. 4-13.
Complex load circuit for Example 4-3.
Solution
The need to block the ﬂow of DC from the source to the load
dictates the use of the matching network of Fig. 4-4C. But,
ﬁrst, let’s get rid of the stray 40-pF capacitor by resonating it
with a shunt inductor at 75 MHz.
ω2Cstray
[2π(75 × 106)2(40 × 10−12)]
= 112.6 nH
This leaves us with the circuit shown in Fig. 4-14. Now that we
have eliminated the stray capacitance, we can proceed with
matching the network between the 50-ohm load and the
apparent 600-ohm load. Thus,
Qs = Qp =
−1 =
50 −1 = 3.32
Z Match
112.6 nH
600 
40 pF
50 
FIG. 4-14.
Resonating the stray load capacitance.
Xs = QsRs = (3.32) (50) = 166 ohms
Xp = Rp
= 600
3.32 = 181 ohms
Therefore, the element values are:
2π(75 × 106)(166) = 12.78 pF
L = Xp
2π(75 × 106) = 384 nH
These values, then, yield the circuit of Fig. 4-15. But notice
that this circuit can be further simpliﬁed by simply replacing
the two shunt inductors with a single inductor. Therefore,
Lnew =
L1L2
L1 + L2
= (384) (112.6)
384 + 112.6 = 87 nH
Matching Network
12.78 pF
112.6
384 nH
40pF
50 
600 
FIG. 4-15.
The circuit of Fig. 4-14 after impedance matching.
The ﬁnal circuit design appears in Fig. 4-16.
Matching Network
12.78 pF
87 nH
40 pF
50 
600 
FIG. 4-16.
Final design circuit for Example 4-3.
the junction between the two networks. This is illustrated in
Fig. 4-19. The signiﬁcance of the negative signs for −Xs1 and
−Xs2 is symbolic. They are used merely to indicate that the
Xs values are the opposite type of reactance from Xp1 and Xp2,
respectively. Thus, if Xp1 is a capacitor, Xs1 must be an induc-
tor, and vice versa. Similarly, if Xp2 is an inductor, Xs2 must
be a capacitor, and vice versa. They do not indicate negative
reactances (capacitors).
The design of each section of the Pi network proceeds exactly
as was done for the L networks in the previous sections. The
virtual resistance (R) must be smaller than either Rs or RL
because it is connected to the series arm of each L section
but, otherwise, it can be any value you wish. Most of the
time, however, R is deﬁned by the desired loaded Q of the
circuit that you specify at the beginning of the design pro-
cess. For our purposes, the loaded Q of this network will

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Low-Q or Wideband Matching Networks
FIG. 4-17.
The three-element Pi network.
FIG. 4-18.
The three-element T network.
Virtual
Resistor
XS1
XS2
FIG. 4-19.
The Pi network shown as two back-to-back L networks.
be deﬁned as:
R −1
(Eq. 4-4)
where
RH = the
largest
terminating
impedance
R = the virtual resistance.
Although this is not entirely accurate, it is a widely accepted
Q-determining formula for this circuit, and is certainly close
enough for most practical work. Example 4-4 illustrates the
procedure.
Any of the networks in Fig. 4-21 will perform the impedance
match between the 100-ohm source and the 1000-ohm load. The
one that you choose for each particular application will depend
on any number of factors including:
1. The elimination of stray reactances.
2. The need for harmonic ﬁltering.
3. The need to pass or block DC voltage.
The T network
The design of the 3-element T network is exactly the same as for
the Pi network except that with the T, you match the load and the
source, through two L-type networks, to a virtual resistance that
is larger than either the load or source resistance. This means
that the two L-type networks will then have their shunt legs
connected together as shown in Fig. 4-22.
TheTnetworkisoftenusedtomatchtwolow-valuedimpedances
when a high-Q arrangement is needed. The loaded Q of the T
network is determined by the L section that has the highest Q.
By deﬁnition, the L section with the highest Q will occur on the
end with the smallest terminating resistor. Remember, too, that
each terminating resistor is in the series leg of each network.
Therefore, the formula for determining the loaded Q of the T
network is:
Rsmall
(Eq. 4-5)
where
= the virtual resistance,
Rsmall = the smallest terminating resistance.
This formula is exactly the same as the Q formula that was pre-
viously given for the Pi-type networks. However, since we have
reversed or “ﬂip-ﬂopped” the L sections to produce the T net-
work, we must also make sure that we redeﬁne the Q formula
to account for the new resistor placement, in relation to those L
networks. In other words, Equations 4-4 and 4-5 are only special
applications of the general formula that is given in Equation 4-1
(and repeated here for convenience).
(Eq. 4-1)
where
Rp = the resistance in the shunt branch of the L network,
Rs = the resistance in the series branch of the L network.
So, try not to get confused with the different deﬁnitions of circuit
Q. They are all the same.
Each L network is calculated in exactly the same manner as was
given in the previous examples and, as we shall soon see, we will
also end up with four possible conﬁgurations for the T network
(Example 4-5).
LOW-Q OR WIDEBAND
MATCHING NETWORKS
Thus far in this chapter we have studied: (1) the L network,
which has a circuit Q that is automatically deﬁned when the
source and load impedances are set, and (2) the Pi and T net-
works, which allow us to select a circuit Q independent of the
source and load impedances as long as the Q chosen is larger
than that which is available with the L network. This seems to
indicate, and rightfully so, that the Pi and T networks are great
for narrow-band matching networks. But what if an impedance
match is required over a fairly broad range of frequencies? How
do we handle that? The answer is to simply use two L sections in

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
EXAMPLE 4-4
Using Fig. 4-19 as a reference, design four different Pi
networks to match a 100-ohm source to a 1000-ohm load.
Each network must have a loaded Q of 15.
Solution
From Equation 4-4, we can ﬁnd the virtual resistance we will
be matching.
Q2 + 1
= 1000
226 = 4.42 ohms
To ﬁnd Xp2 we have:
Xp2 = Rp
= RL
Q = 1000
= 66.7 ohms
Similarly, to ﬁnd Xs2:
Xs2 = QRseries = 15 (R) = (15)(4.42) = 66.3 ohms
This completes the design of the L section on the load side of
the network. Note that Rseries in the above equation was
substituted for the virtual resistor R, which by deﬁnition is in
the series arm of the L section.
The Q for the other L network is now deﬁned by the ratio of
Rs to R, as per Equation 4-1, where:
Q1 =
R −1 =
4.42 −1 = 4.6
Notice here that the source resistor is now considered to be in
the shunt leg of the L network. Therefore, Rs is deﬁned as Rp,
Xp1 = Rp
= 100
4.6 = 21.7 ohms
Similarly,
Xs2 = Q1Rseries = Q1R = (4.6)(4.46) = 20.51 ohms
The actual network design is now complete and is shown in
Fig. 4-20. Remember that the virtual resistor (R) is not really in
the circuit and, therefore, is not shown. Reactances −Xs1 and
21.7
20.5
66.3
66.7
1000
XS1
XS2
FIG. 4-20.
Calculated reactances for Example 4-4.
−Xs2 are now in series and can simply be added together to
form a single component.
So far in the design, we have dealt only with reactances and
have not yet computed actual component values. This is
because of the need to maintain a general design approach so
that four ﬁnal networks can be generated quickly as per the
problem statement.
Notice that Xp1, Xs1, Xp2, and Xs2 can all be either capacitive
or inductive reactances. The only constraint is that Xp1 and Xs1
are of opposite types, and Xp2 and Xs2 are of opposite types.
This yields the four networks of Fig. 4-21 (the source and load
have been omitted). Each component in Fig. 4-21 is shown as
a reactance (in ohms). Therefore, to perform the
transformation from the dual-L to the Pi network, the two
series components are merely added if they are alike, and
subtracted if the reactances are of opposite type. The ﬁnal
step, of course, is to change each reactance into a component
value of capacitance and inductance at the frequency of
operation.
20.5 
20.5 
20.5 
20.5 
21.7 
21.7 
21.7 
21.7 
66.9 
66.9 
66.9 
66.9 
87.4 
87.4 
46.4 
46.4 
66.7 
66.7 
66.7 
66.7 
66.7 
66.7 
66.7 
66.7 
21.7 
21.7 
21.7 
21.7 
FIG. 4-21.
The transformation from double-L to Pi networks.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Low-Q or Wideband Matching Networks
still another conﬁguration, as shown in Fig. 4-25. Notice here
that the virtual resistor is in the shunt leg of one L section and
in the series leg of the other L section. We, therefore, have two
series-connected L sections rather than the back-to-back conﬁg-
uration of the Pi and T networks. In this new conﬁguration, the
value of the virtual resistor (R) must be larger than the smallest
EXAMPLE 4-5
Using Fig. 4-22 as a reference, design four different networks
to match a 10-ohm source to a 50-ohm load. Each network is
to have a loaded Q of 10.
Virtual
XP1
XP2
FIG.4-22.
The T network shown as two back-to-back L networks.
Solution
Using Equation 4-5, we can ﬁnd the virtual resistance we need
for the match.
R = Rsmall(Q2 + 1) = 10(101) = 1010 ohms
From Equation 4-2:
Xs1 = QRs = 10(10) = 100 ohms
From Equation 4-3:
Xp1 = R
Q = 1010
= 101 ohms
Now, for the L network on the load end, the Q is deﬁned by
the virtual resistor and the load resistor. Thus,
Q2 =
−1 =
1010
−1 = 4.4
Therefore,
Xp2 = R
= 1010
= 230 ohms
Xs2 = Q2RL = (4.4)(50) = 220 ohms
The network is now complete and is shown in Fig. 4-23
without the virtual resistor.
The two shunt reactances of Fig. 4-23 can again be combined
to form a single element by simply substituting a value that is
equal to the combined equivalent parallel reactance of
the two.
The four possible T-type networks that can be used for
matching the 10-ohm source to the 50-ohm load are shown
in Fig. 4-24.
XP1
XP2
FIG. 4-23.
The calculated reactances of Example 4-5.
FIG. 4-24.
The transformation of circuits from double-L to T-type
networks.
termination impedance and, also, smaller than the largest termi-
nation impedance. Of course, any virtual resistance that satisﬁes
these criteria may be chosen. The net result is a range of loaded-
Q values that is less than the range of Q values obtainable from
either a single L section, or the Pi and T networks previously
described.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
XP2
Virtual
RL  RS
XP1
(A) R in shunt leg
XP2
Virtual
RL 	 RS
XP1
(B) R in series leg
FIG. 4-25.
Two series-connected L networks for lower Q applications.
The maximum bandwidth (minimum Q) available from this net-
work is obtained when the virtual resistor (R) is made equal to
the geometric mean of the two impedances being matched.
RSRL
(Eq. 4-6)
The loaded Q of the network, for our purposes, is deﬁned as:
Rsmaller
−1 =
Rlarger
(Eq. 4-7)
where
= the virtual resistance,
Rsmaller = the smallest terminating resistance,
Rlarger = the largest terminating resistance.
If even wider bandwidths are needed, more L networks may be
cascaded with virtual resistances between each network. Opti-
mum bandwidths in these cases are obtained if the ratios of each
of the two succeeding resistances are equal:
Rsmaller
= R2
= R3
. . . = Rlarger
(Eq. 4-8)
where
Rsmaller = the smallest terminating resistance,
Rlarger = the largest terminating resistance,
R1, R2, . . . Rn = virtual resistors.
This is shown in Fig. 4-26.
The design procedure for these wideband matching networks is
precisely the same as was given for the previous examples. To
design for a speciﬁc low Q, simply solve Equation 4-7 for R to
ﬁnd the virtual resistance needed. Or, to design for an optimally
wide bandwidth, solve Equation 4-6 for R. Once R is known, the
design is straightforward
THE SMITH CHART
Perhaps one of the most useful graphical tools available to the
RF circuit designer today is the Smith Chart, shown in Fig. 4-27.
Rsmaller XS1
XP2
XP3
Rlarger
XP1
FIG. 4-26.
Expanded version of Fig. 4-25 for even wider bandwidths.
The chart was originally conceived back in the 1930s by a Bell
Laboratories engineer named Phillip Smith, who wanted an eas-
ier method of solving the tedious repetitive equations that often
appear in RF theory. His solution, appropriately named the Smith
Chart, is still widely in use.
At ﬁrst glance, a Smith Chart appears to be quite complex.
Indeed, why would anyone of sound mind even care to look at
such a chart? The answer is really quite simple; once the Smith
Chart and its uses are understood, the RF circuit designer’s job
becomes much less tedious and time consuming. Very lengthy
complex equations can be solved graphically on the chart in sec-
onds, thus lessening the possibility of errors creeping into the
calculations.
Smith Chart Construction
The mathematics behind the construction of a Smith Chart are
given here for those who are interested. It is important to note,
however, that you do not need to know or understand the math-
ematics surrounding the actual construction of a chart as long
as you understand what the chart represents and how it can be
used to your advantage. Indeed, there are so many uses for the
chart that an entire volume has been written on the subject. In
this chapter, we will concentrate mainly on the Smith Chart as
an impedance matching tool and other uses will be covered in
later chapters. The mathematics follow.
The reﬂection coefﬁcient of a load impedance when given a
source impedance can be found by the formula:
ρ = Zs −ZL
Zs + ZL
(Step 1)
In normalized form, this equation becomes:
ρ = Zo −1
Zo + 1
(Step 2)
where Zo is a complex impedance of the form R + jX.
The polar form of the reﬂection coefﬁcient can also be repre-
sented in rectangular coordinates:
ρ = p + jq
Substituting into Step 2, we have:
p + jq = R + jX −1
R + jX + 1
(Step 3)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Smith Chart
FIG. 4-27.
The Smith Chart. (Courtesy Analog Instruments Co.) For a more detailed full color view of this ﬁgure, please visit our companion site at
http://books.elsevier.com/companions/9780750685184.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
If we solve for the real and imaginary parts of p + jq, we get:
p = R2 −1 + X2
(R + 1)2 + X2
(Step 4)
(R + 1)2 + X2
(Step 5)
Solve Step 5 for X:
p(R + 1)2 −R2 + 1
1 −p
1/2
(Step 6)
Then, substitute Step 6 into Step 5 to obtain:
R + 1
+ q2 =
R + 1
(Step 7)
Step 7 is the equation for a family of circles whose centers are at:
R + 1
q = 0
and whose radii are equal to:
R + 1
These are the constant resistance circles, some of which are
shown in Fig. 4-28A.
Similarly, we can eliminate R from Steps 4 and 5 to obtain:
(p −1)2 +
q −1
(Step 8)
which represents a family of circles with centers at p = 1,
V = 1/X, and radii of 1/X. These circles are shown plotted on
the p, jq axis in Fig. 4-28B.
As the preceding mathematics indicate, the Smith Chart is basi-
cally a combination of a family of circles and a family of arcs
of circles, the centers and radii of which can be calculated using
the equations given (Steps 1 through 8). Fig. 4-28 shows the
chart broken down into these two families. The circles of Fig.
4-28A are known as constant resistance circles. Each point on
a constant resistance circle has the same resistance as any other
point on the circle. The arcs of circles shown in Fig. 4-28B are
known as constant reactance circles, as each point on a circle
has the same reactance as any other point on that circle. These
circles are centered off of the chart and, therefore, only a small
portion of each is contained within the boundary of the chart. All
arcs above the centerline of the chart represent +jX, or inductive
reactances, and all arcs below the centerline represent −jX, or
capacitive reactances. The centerline must, therefore, represent
an axis where X = 0 and is, therefore, called the real axis.
Notice in Fig. 4-28A that the “constant resistance = 0” circle
deﬁnes the outer boundary of the chart. As the resistive compo-
nent increases, the radius of each circle decreases and the center
(A) Constant resistance circles
(B) Constant reactance circles
FIG. 4-28.
Smith Chart construction.
of each circle moves toward the right on the chart. Then, at inﬁ-
nite resistance, you end up with an inﬁnitely small circle that
is located at the extreme right-hand side of the chart. A similar
thing happens for the constant reactance circles shown in Fig.
4-28B. As the magnitude of the reactive component increases
(−jX or +jX), the radius of each circle decreases, and the center
of each circle moves closer and closer to the extreme right side
of the chart. Inﬁnite resistance and inﬁnite reactance are thus
represented by the same point on the chart.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Smith Chart
Since the outer boundary of the chart is deﬁned as the “R = 0”
circle, with higher values of R being contained within the chart,
it follows then that any point outside of the chart must contain a
negative resistance. The concept of negative resistance is useful
in the study of oscillators and it is mentioned here only to state
that the concept does exist, and if needed, the Smith Chart can
be expanded to deal with it.
When the two charts of Fig. 4-28 are incorporated into a single
version, the Smith Chart of Fig. 4-29 is born. If we add a few
peripheral scales to aid us in other RF design tasks, such as
determining standing wave ratio (SWR), reﬂection coefﬁcient,
and transmission loss along a transmission line, the basic chart
of Fig. 4-27 is completed.
Basic Smith Chart Tips
When developing the Smith Chart, there are certain precautions
that should be noted. These are among the most important:
• All the circles have one same, unique intersecting point
at the coordinate (1, 0).
• The zero circle where there is no resistance (R = 0) is the
largest one.
• The inﬁnite resistor circle is reduced to one point at (1, 0).
• There should be no negative resistance. If one (or more)
should occur, you will be faced with the possibility of
oscillatory conditions.
• Another resistance value can be chosen by simply
selecting another circle corresponding to the new value.
Plotting Impedance Values
Any point on the Smith Chart represents a series combination of
resistance and reactance of the form Z = R + jX. Thus, to locate
the impedance Z = 1 + j1, you would ﬁnd the R = 1 constant
resistance circle and follow it until it crossed the X = 1 constant
reactancecircle. Thejunctionofthesetwocircleswouldthenrep-
resent the needed impedance value. This particular point, shown
in Fig. 4-30, is located in the upper half of the chart because
X is a positive reactance or an inductor. On the other hand, the
point 1 −j1 is located in the lower half of the chart because, in
this instance, X is a negative quantity and represents a capacitor.
Thus, the junction of the R = 1 constant resistance circle and the
X = −1 constant reactance circle deﬁnes that point.
In general, then, to ﬁnd any series impedance of the form R ± jX
onaSmithChart, yousimplyﬁndthejunctionoftheR = constant
and X = constant circles. In many cases, the actual circles will
not be present on the chart and you will have to interpolate
between two that are shown. Thus, plotting impedances and,
therefore, any manipulation of those impedances must be con-
sidered an inexact procedure which is subject to “pilot error.”
Most of the time, however, the error introduced by subjective
judgements on the part of the user, in plotting impedances on the
chart, is so small as to be negligible for practical work. Fig. 4-31
shows a few more impedances plotted on the chart.
Notice that all of the impedance values plotted in Fig. 4-31 are
very small numbers. Indeed, if you try to plot an impedance
of Z = 100 + j150 ohms, you will not be able to do it accu-
rately because the R = 100 and X = 150 ohm circles would be
(if they were drawn) on the extreme right edge of the chart—
very close to inﬁnity. In order to facilitate the plotting of
larger impedances, normalization must be used. That is, each
impedance to be plotted is divided by a convenient number
that will place the new normalized impedance near the center
of the chart where increased accuracy in plotting is obtained.
Thus, for the preceding example, where Z = 100 + j150 ohms,
it would be convenient to divide Z by 100, which yields the value
Z = 1 + j1.5. This is very easily found on the chart. Once a chart
is normalized in this manner, all impedances plotted on that chart
must be divided by the same number in the normalization pro-
cess. Otherwise, you will be left with a bunch of impedances
with which nothing can be done.
Impedance Manipulation on the Chart
Fig. 4-32 graphically indicates what happens when a series
capacitive reactance of −j1.0 ohm is added to an impedance of
Z = 0.5 + j0.7 ohm. Mathematically, the result is
Z = 0.5 + j0.7 −j1.0
= 0.5 −j0.3 ohms
which represents a series RC quantity. Graphically, what we
have done is move downward along the R = 0.5-ohm constant
resistance circle for a distance of X = −j1.0 ohm. This is the
plotted impedance point of Z = 0.5 −j0.3 ohm, as shown. In
a similar manner, as shown in Fig. 4-33, adding a series induc-
tance to a plotted impedance value simply causes a move upward
along a constant resistance circle to the new impedance value.
This type of construction is very important in the design of
impedance-matching networks using the Smith Chart and must
be understood. In general then, the addition of a series capacitor
to an impedance moves that impedance downward (counter-
clockwise) along a constant resistance circle for a distance that is
equal to the reactance of the capacitor. The addition of any series
inductor to a plotted impedance moves that impedance upward
(clockwise) along a constant resistance circle for a distance that
is equal to the reactance of the inductor.
Conversion of Impedance to Admittance
The Smith Chart, although described thus far as a family
of impedance coordinates, can easily be used to convert any
impedance (Z) to an admittance (Y), and vice versa. This can
be accomplished by simply ﬂipping the Smith Chart over. Note
that if both the impedance and admittance charts are plotted
together, overlaid, one upon the other, the new chart is called an
immittance chart. While this may sound complicated, it can be
extremely useful in designing match networks with components
like series or shunt inductors and capacitors.
As previously pointed out, a series inductor, when added to
a load, causes a rotation clockwise along a circle of constant
resistance on the chart, while a shunt inductor causes rotation

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
FIG. 4-29.
The basic Smith Chart. For a more detailed full color view of this ﬁgure, please visit our companion site at
http://books.elsevier.com/companions/9780750685184.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Smith Chart
FIG. 4-30.
Plotting impedances on the chart. For a more detailed full color view of this ﬁgure, please visit our companion site at
http://books.elsevier.com/companions/9780750685184.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
FIG. 4-31.
More impedances are plotted on the chart. For a more detailed full color view of this ﬁgure, please visit our companion site at
http://books.elsevier.com/companions/9780750685184.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Smith Chart
FIG. 4-32.
Addition of a series capacitor. For a more detailed full color view of this ﬁgure, please visit our companion site at
http://books.elsevier.com/companions/9780750685184.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
FIG. 4-33.
Addition of a series inductor. For a more detailed full color view of this ﬁgure, please visit our companion site at
http://books.elsevier.com/companions/9780750685184.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Smith Chart
Y  G  jB
Y  G  jB
FIG. 4-34.
Circuit representation for admittance.
counter-clockwise along a circle of constant admittance. In a
similar manner, a series capacitor, added to a load, causes rota-
tion counter-clockwise along a circle of constant resistance,
while a shunt capacitor causes rotation clockwise along a circle
of constant admittance.
In mathematical terms, an admittance is simply the inverse of an
impedance, or
Y = 1
(Eq. 4-9)
where the admittance (Y) contains both a real and an imaginary
part, similar to the impedance (Z). Thus,
Y = G ± jB
(Eq. 4-10)
where
G = the conductance in mhos,
B = the susceptance in mhos.
The circuit representation is shown in Fig. 4-34. Notice that
the susceptance is positive for a capacitor and negative for an
inductor, whereas, for reactance, the opposite is true.
To ﬁnd the inverse of a series impedance of the form Z = R + jX
mathematically, you would simply use Equation 4-9 and perform
the resulting calculation. But, how can you use the Smith Chart to
perform the calculation for you without the need for a calculator?
The easiest way of describing the use of the chart in performing
this function is to ﬁrst work a problem out mathematically and,
then, plot the results on the chart to see how the two functions
are related. Take, for example, the series impedance Z = 1 + j1.
The inverse of Z is:
1 + j1
1.414∠45◦
= 0.7071∠−45◦
= 0.5 −j0.5 mho
If we plot the points 1 + j1 and 0.5 −j0.5 on the Smith Chart,
we can easily see the graphical relationship between the two.
This construction is shown in Fig. 4-35. Notice that the two
points are located at exactly the same distance (d) from the cen-
ter of the chart but in opposite directions (180◦) from each other.
Indeed, the same relationship holds true for any impedance and
its inverse. Therefore, without the aid of a calculator, you can
ﬁnd the reciprocal of an impedance or an admittance by simply
plotting the point on the chart, measuring the distance (d) from
the center of the chart to that point, and, then, plotting the mea-
sured result the same distance from the center but in the opposite
direction (180◦) from the original point. This is a very simple
construction technique that can be done in seconds.
Another approach that we could take to achieve the same result
involves the manipulation of the actual chart rather than the per-
forming of a construction on the chart. For instance, rather than
locating a point 180◦away from our original starting point, why
not just rotate the chart itself 180◦while ﬁxing the starting point
in space? The result is the same, and it can be read directly off of
the rotated chart without performing a single construction. This
is shown in Fig. 4-36 (Smith Chart Form ZY-01-N)∗where the
rotated chart is shown in black. Notice that the impedance plot-
ted (solid lines on the red coordinates) is located at Z = 1 + j1
ohms, and the reciprocal of that (the admittance) is shown by
dotted lines on the black coordinates as Y = 0.5 −j0.5. Keep in
mind that because we have rotated the chart 180◦to obtain the
admittance coordinates, the upper half of the admittance chart
represents negative susceptance (−jB) which is inductive, while
the lower half of the admittance chart represents a positive sus-
ceptance (+jB) which is capacitive. Therefore, nothing has been
lost in the rotation process.
The chart shown in Fig. 4-36, containing the superimposed
impedance and admittance coordinates, is an extremely useful
version of theSmithChartand istheonethatwewillusethrough-
out the remainder of the book. But ﬁrst, let’s take a closer look
at the admittance coordinates alone.
Admittance Manipulation on the Chart
Just as the impedance coordinates of Figs. 4-32 and 4-33 were
used to obtain a visual indication of what occurs when a series
reactance is added to an impedance, the admittance coordinates
provide a visual indication of what occurs when a shunt element
is added to an admittance. The addition of a shunt capacitor
is shown in Fig. 4-37. Here we begin with an admittance of
Y = 0.2 −j0.5 mho and add a shunt capacitor with a suscep-
tance (reciprocal of reactance) of +j0.8 mho. Mathematically,
we know that parallel susceptances are simply added together
to ﬁnd the equivalent susceptance. When this is done, the result
becomes:
Y = 0.2 −j0.5 + j0.8
= 0.2 + j0.3 mho
If this point is plotted on the admittance chart, we quickly
recognize that all we have done is to move along a constant
conductance circle (G) downward (clockwise) a distance of
jB = 0.8 mho. In other words, the real part of the admittance has
not changed, only the imaginary part has. Similarly, as Fig. 4-38
∗Smith Chart Form ZY-01-N is a copyright of Analog Instruments Company,
P.O. Box 808, New Providence, NJ 07974. It and other Smith Chart accessories
are available from the company.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
FIG. 4-35.
Impedance-admittance conversion on the Smith Chart. For a more detailed full color view of this ﬁgure, please visit our companion site at
http://books.elsevier.com/companions/9780750685184.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Smith Chart
FIG. 4-36.
Superimposed admittance coordinates. For a more detailed full color view of this ﬁgure, please visit our companion site at
http://books.elsevier.com/companions/9780750685184.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
FIG. 4-37.
Addition of a shunt capacitor. For a more detailed full color view of this ﬁgure, please visit our companion site at
http://books.elsevier.com/companions/9780750685184.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Smith Chart
FIG. 4-38.
Addition of a shunt inductor. For a more detailed full color view of this ﬁgure, please visit our companion site at
http://books.elsevier.com/companions/9780750685184.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
indicates, adding a shunt inductor to an admittance moves the
point along a constant conductance circle upward (counterclock-
wise) a distance (−jB) equal to the value of its susceptance.
If we again superimpose the impedance and admittance coor-
dinates and combine Figs. 4-32, 4-33, 4-37, and 4-38 for the
general case, we obtain the useful chart shown in Fig. 4-39.
This chart graphically illustrates the direction of travel, along
the impedance and admittance coordinates, which results when
the particular type of component that is indicated is added to
an existing impedance or admittance. A simple example should
illustrate the point (Example 4-6).
IMPEDANCE MATCHING ON THE
SMITH CHART
Because of the ease with which series and shunt components can
be added in ladder-type arrangements on the Smith Chart, while
easily keeping track of the impedance as seen at the input termi-
nals of the structure, the chart seems to be an excellent candidate
for an impedance-matching tool. The idea here is simple. Given a
load impedance and given the impedance that the source would
like to see, simply plot the load impedance and, then, begin
adding series and shunt elements on the chart until the desired
impedance is achieved–just as was done in Example 4-6.
Two-Element Matching
Two-element matching networks are mathematically very easy
to design using the formulas provided in earlier sections of this
chapter. For the purpose of illustration, however, let’s begin our
study of a Smith Chart impedance-matching procedure with the
simple network given in Example 4-7.
To make life much easier for you as a Smith Chart user, the
following equations may be used. For a series-C component:
(Eq. 4-11)
For a series-L component:
L = XN
(Eq. 4-12)
For a shunt-C component:
(Eq. 4-13)
For a shunt-L component:
L = N
(Eq. 4-14)
where
ω = 2π f ,
X = the reactance as read from the chart,
B = the susceptance as read from the chart,
N = the number used to normalize the original impedances
that are to be matched.
If you use the preceding equations, you will never have
to worry about changing susceptances into reactances before
unnormalizing the impedances. The equations take care of both
operations. The only thing you have to do is read the value of
susceptance (for shunt components) or reactance (for series com-
ponents) directly off of the chart, plug this value into the equation
used, and wait for your actual component values to pop out.
Three-Element Matching
In earlier sections of this chapter, you learned that the only
real difference between two-element and three-element match-
ing is that with three-element matching, you are able to choose
the loaded Q for the network. That was easy enough to do in
a mathematical-design approach due to the virtual resistance
concept. But how can circuit Q be represented on a Smith Chart?
As you have seen before, in earlier chapters, the Q of a series-
impedance circuit is simply equal to the ratio of its reactance to
its resistance. Thus, any point on a Smith Chart has a Q associ-
ated with it. Alternately, if you were to specify a certain Q, you
could ﬁnd an inﬁnite number of points on the chart that could sat-
isfy that Q requirement. For example, the following impedances
located on a Smith Chart have a Q of 5:
R + jX = 1 ± j5
= 0.5 ± j2.5
= 0.2 ± j1
= 0.1 ± j0.5
= 0.05 ± j0.25
These values are plotted in Fig. 4-45 and form the arcs shown.
Thus, any impedance located on these arcs must have a Q of 5.
Similar arcs for other values of Q can be drawn with the arc of
inﬁnite Q being located along the perimeter of the chart and the
Q = 0 arc (actually a straight line) lying along the pure resistance
line located at the center of the chart.
The design of high-Q three-element matching networks on a
Smith Chart is approached in much the same manner as in the
mathematical methods presented earlier in this chapter. Namely,
one branch of the network will determine the loaded Q of the
circuit, and it is this branch that will set the characteristics of the
rest of the circuit.
The procedure for designing a three-element impedance- match-
ing network for a speciﬁed Q is summarized as follows:
1. Plot the constant-Q arcs for the speciﬁed Q.
2. Plot the load impedance and the complex conjugate of
the source impedance.
3. Determine the end of the network that will be used to
establish the loaded Q of the design. For T networks, the
end with the smaller terminating resistance determines
the Q. For Pi networks, the end with the larger
terminating resistor sets the Q.
4. For T networks:
Rs > RL

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Impedance Matching on the Smith Chart
FIG. 4-39.
Summary of component addition on a Smith Chart. For a more detailed full color view of this ﬁgure, please visit our companion site at
http://books.elsevier.com/companions/9780750685184.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
Move from the load along a constant-R circle (series
element) and intersect the Q curve. The length of this
move determines your ﬁrst element. Then, proceed from
this point to Z∗
s (Z∗
s = ZB conjugate) in two moves–ﬁrst
with a shunt and, then, with a series element.
Rs < RL
Find the intersection (I) of the Q curve and the source
impedance’s R = constant circle, and plot that point.
Move from the load impedance to point I with two
elements—ﬁrst, a series element and, then, a shunt
element. Move from point I to Z∗
s along the R = constant
circle with another series element.
3. For Pi networks:
Rs > RL
Find the intersection (I) of the Q curve and the source
impedance’s G = constant circle, and plot that point.
Move from the load impedance to point I with two
elements—ﬁrst, a shunt element and, then, a series
element. Move from point I to Z∗
s along the G = constant
circle with another shunt element.
Rs < RL
Move from the load along a constant G circle (shunt
element) and intersect the Q curve. The length of this
move determines your ﬁrst element. Then, proceed from
this point to Z∗
s in two moves—ﬁrst, with a series
element and, then, with a shunt element.
The above procedures might seem complicated to the neophyte
but remember that we are only forcing the constant-resistance or
constant-conductance arc, located between the Q-determining
termination and the speciﬁed-Q curve, to be one of our
matching elements. An example may help to clarify matters
(Example 4-8).
Multi-Element Matching
In multi-element matching networks where there is no Q con-
straint, the Smith Chart becomes a veritable treasure trove
containing an inﬁnite number of possible solutions. To get from
point A to point B on a Smith Chart, there is, of course, an opti-
mum solution. However, the optimum solution is not the only
solution. Thetwo-elementnetworkgetsyoufrompointAtopoint
B with the least number of components and the three-element
network can provide a speciﬁed Q by following a different route.
If you do not care about Q, however, there are 3-, 4-, 5-, 10-,
and 20-element (and more) impedance-matching networks that
are easily designed on a Smith Chart by simply following the
constant-conductance and constant-resistance circles until you
eventually arrive at point B, which, in our case, is usually the
complex conjugate of the source impedance. Fig. 4-48 illustrates
this point. In the lower right-hand corner of the chart is pointA. In
the upper left-hand corner is point B.Three of the inﬁnite number
of possible solutions that can be used to get from pointA to point
B, by adding series and shunt inductances and capacitances, are
EXAMPLE 4-6
What is the impedance looking into the network shown in
Fig. 4-40? Note that the task has been simpliﬁed due to
the fact that shunt susceptances are shown rather than
shunt reactances.
jX  0.9
jB  1.1
jX  1.4
jX  1
R  1
 0.3
FIG. 4-40.
Circuit for Example 4-6.
Solution
This problem is very easily handled on a Smith Chart and
not a single calculation needs to be performed. The
solution is shown in Fig. 4-42. It is accomplished as
follows.
First, break the circuit down into individual branches as
shown in Fig. 4-41. Plot the impedance of the series RL
branch where Z = 1 + j1 ohm. This is point A in Fig. 4-42.
Next, following the rules diagrammed in Fig. 4-39, begin
adding each component back into the circuit, one at a
time. Thus, the following constructions (Fig. 4-42) should
be noted:
jX  0.9
R  1
jB  1.1
jX  1.4
jX  1
 0.3
FIG. 4-41.
Circuit is broken down into individual branch
elements.
Arc AB = shunt L = −jB = 0.3 mho
Arc BC = series C = −jX = 1.4 ohms
Arc CD = shunt C = +jB = 1.1 mhos
Arc DE = series L = +jX = 0.9 ohm
The impedance at point E (Fig. 4-42) can then be read
directly off of the chart as Z = 0.2 + j0.5 ohm.
Continued on next page

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Impedance Matching on the Smith Chart
EXAMPLE 4-6—Cont
FIG. 4-42.
Smith Chart solution for Example 4-6. For a more detailed full color view of this ﬁgure, please visit our companion site at
http://books.elsevier.com/companions/9780750685184.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
EXAMPLE 4-7
Design a two-element impedance-matching network on a
Smith Chart so as to match a 25 −j15-ohm source to a
100 −j25-ohm load at 60 MHz. The matching network must
also act as a low-pass ﬁlter between the source and the load.
Solution
Since the source is a complex impedance, it wants to “see” a
load impedance that is equal to its complex conjugate (as
discussed in earlier sections of this chapter). Thus, the task
before us is to force the 100 −j25-ohm load to look like an
impedance of 25 + j15 ohms.
Obviously, the source and load impedances are both too large
to plot on the chart, so normalization is necessary. Let’s choose
a convenient number (N = 50) and divide all impedances by
this number. The results are 0.5 + j0.3 ohm for the impedance
the source would like to see and 2 −j0.5 ohms for the actual
load impedance. These two values are easily plotted on the
Smith Chart, as shown in Fig. 4-44, where, at point A, ZL is
the normalized load impedance and, at point C, Z∗
s is the
normalized complex conjugate of the source impedance.
The requirement that the matching network also be a
low-pass ﬁlter forces us to use some form of series-L, shunt-C
arrangement. The only way we can get from the impedance
at point A to the impedance at point C and still fulﬁll this
requirement is along the path shown in Fig. 4-44. Thus,
following the rules of Fig. 4-39, the arc AB of Fig. 4-44 is a
shunt capacitor with a value of +jB = 0.73 mho. The arc BC is
a series inductor with a value of +jX = 1.2 ohms.
The shunt capacitor as read from the Smith Chart is a
susceptance and can be changed into an equivalent reactance
by simply taking the reciprocal.
Xo =
+jB =
j0.73 mho = −j1.37 ohms
To complete the network, we must now unnormalize all
impedance values by multiplying them by the number
N = 50—the value originally used in the normalization
process. Therefore:
XL = 60 ohms
XC = 68.5 ohms
The component values are:
L = XL
2π(60 × 106)
= 159 nH
2π(60 × 106) (68.5)
= 38.7 pF
The ﬁnal circuit is shown in Fig. 4-43.
25  j15 
100  j25 
159 nH
38.7 pF
FIG. 4-43.
Final circuit for Example 4-7.
Continued on next page
shown. Solution 1 starts with a series-L conﬁguration and takes
9 elements to get to point B. Solution 2 starts with a shunt-L
procedure and takes 8 elements, while Solution 3 starts with a
shunt-C arrangement and takes 5 elements. The element reac-
tances and susceptances can be read directly from the chart, and
Equations 4-11 through 4-14 can be used to calculate the actual
component values within minutes.
SOFTWARE DESIGN TOOLS
Another method for matching a given source to a given load is
to use one of a number of easily available software design tools.
Options range from inexpensive, web-based Smith Chart tools to
more comprehensive, integrated design tool environments with
impedance matching capabilities.
Smith Chart Tools
When the Smith Chart was ﬁrst created, it was quickly adopted as
a standard, required skill for microwave engineers. These days,
it is being employed by designers of high-speed circuits as well
as newly degreed RF engineers. While the process of using a
Smith Chart remains the same, it no longer has to be manual
in nature. Instead, today’s computerized Smith Chart software
tools provide the engineer real visual insight into the process
of mapping the impedance plan onto the reﬂection coefﬁcient
plane.
Rather than on a piece of paper, computerized Smith Chart
tools put the entire process on the screen, including a clearly
labeled chart, and tabular display of frequency, impedance and
VSWR data. Even the circuit that is being designed appears on

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Software Design Tools
EXAMPLE 4-7—Cont
FIG. 4-44.
Solution of Example 4-7. For a more detailed full color view of this ﬁgure, please visit our companion site at
http://books.elsevier.com/companions/9780750685184.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
EXAMPLE 4-7—Cont
FIG. 4-45.
Lines of constant Q. For a more detailed full color view of this ﬁgure, please visit our companion site at
http://books.elsevier.com/companions/9780750685184.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Software Design Tools
EXAMPLE 4-7—Cont
FIG. 4-46.
Smith Chart solution for Example 4-8. For a more detailed full color view of this ﬁgure, please visit our companion site at
http://books.elsevier.com/companions/9780750685184.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
EXAMPLE 4-8
Design a T network to match a Z = 15 + j15-ohm source to a
225-ohm load at 30 MHz with a loaded Q of 5.
Solution
Following the procedures previously outlined, draw the arcs
for Q = 5 ﬁrst and, then, plot the load impedance and the
complex conjugate of the source impedance. Obviously,
normalization is necessary as the impedances are too large to
be located on the chart. Divide by a convenient value (choose
N = 75) for normalization. Therefore:
s = 0.2 −j0.2 ohms
ZL = 3 ohms
The construction details for the design are shown in Fig. 4-46.
The design statement speciﬁes a T network. Thus, the source
termination will determine the network Q because Rs < RL.
Following the procedure for Rs < RL (Step 4, above), ﬁrst plot
point I, which is the intersection of the Q = 5 curve and the
R = constant circuit that passes through Z∗
s. Then, move from
the load impedance to point I with two elements.
Element 1 = arc AB = series L = j2.5 ohms
Element 2 = arc BI = shunt C = j1.15 mhos
Then, move from point I to Z∗
s along the R = constant circle.
Element 3 = arc IC = series L = j0.8 ohm
Use Equations 4-11 through 4-14 to ﬁnd the actual element
values.
Element 1 = series L:
(2.5)75
2π(30 × 106)
= 995 nH
Element 2 = shunt C:
1.15
2π(30 × 106)75
= 81 pF
Element 3 = series L:
(0.8)75
2π(30 × 106)
= 318 nH
The ﬁnal network is shown in Fig. 4-47.
15  j15
318 nH
995 nH
81 pF
225 
FIG. 4-47.
Final circuit for Example 4-8.
the screen. The engineer simply uses a library of lumped and
distributed elements to formulate a matched design. Most tools
even come with their own time-saving macro commands and
tutorials with plenty of examples to guide the engineer through
the process. These types of tools generally cost on the order of
a hundred dollars or less.
Design Example
As an example, consider that the SmithMatch impedance
match network design utility from Microwave Software
(www.microwavesoftware.com) is used to analyze a three-
element distributed line network for use over the range of 2000
to 3000 MHz. The intention is to match a 10-ohm ﬁxed load to
a 50-ohm source (Fig. 4-49).
Note that although SmithMatch is an inexpensive web-based
solution, that does not imply that it is not extremely powerful.
The Internet simply offers a lower-cost vehicle for delivering the
solution to engineers.
The load impedance ﬁle for this example is named “TRL3.”
It contains a 10-ohm ﬁxed resistor at four frequencies in the
2000-MHz to 3000-MHz range. To begin, call the SmithMatch
module by choosing “(1) SmithMatch” from the tool’s Main
Menu. You will see:
System Z0 [ < Enter >= Quit]?_
Enter “50” as the system Z0 characteristic impedance, and then
press <Enter>.
Filename?_
Enter “TRL3” as the name of the .IMP load impedance ﬁle and
then press <Enter>.
The 10-ohm load ﬁle will appear on the screen. A small circle
marks the low end of the band as illustrated in Fig. 4-50.
A VSWR = 1.5 circle is added to the plot in Fig. 4-50. When
this is done, the “Command ?” prompt will appear. Next, three
transmission line circuit elements (TRLs) are added—one at a
time—and the ﬁrst cut match analyzed.
The SmithMatch tool deﬁnes the element code for a “TRL” as
16. Note that a distributed line has two degrees of freedom, its Z0
(characteristicimpedance), inohms, anditselectricallinelength,
theta, in degrees. An important convention in SmithMatch is
that when you enter theta—the electrical length of a distributed

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Software Design Tools
FIG. 4-48.
Multi-element matching. For a more detailed full color view of this ﬁgure, please visit our companion site at
http://books.elsevier.com/companions/9780750685184.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
element, like a 16, 17, or 18 in the tool’s Element Library—you
specify the length in degrees at the low end of the band.
In this instance, since the band is 2 to 3 GHz, the line lengths
must be speciﬁed at a frequency of 2 GHz. The computation is
simple. Just multiply the given length in degrees by the fraction
2/3. The “2” is the low band edge, and the “3” is the reference
frequency for the 90-degree length lines.
When you type “16” at the “Command ?” prompt, to enter the
Z0 = 20-ohm line closest to the load, you’ll be asked to enter
Units: ohms, degrees
Note :  Line length specified at 3000 MHz
FIG. 4-49.
First cut network using the SmithMatch solution available at
www.microwavesoftware.com.
VSWR: 1.5
System Z0: 50 ohms
Data File: TRL3
Freq 
VSWR
2000.0 
10.000 
0.000 
5.000
2333.0 
10.000 
0.000 
5.000
2667.0 
10.000 
0.000 
5.000
3000.0 
10.000 
0.000 
5.000
Command ? _
Ckt: \Load
03-19-2005 @ 10:10:22
1.0
2.0
5.0
0.5
0.2
FIG. 4-50.
The low end of the band is denoted by the small circle over on the left half of the Smith Chart on the axis of reals.
VSWR: 1.5
System Z0: 50 ohms
Data File: TRL3
Freq 
VSWR
2000.0 
22.857 
14.846 
2.425
2333.0 
29.602 
14.277 
1.890
2667.0 
36.688 
9.402 
1.460
3000.0 
40.000 
0.000 
1.250
Command ? _
Ckt: \16(20,60\Load
03-19-2005 @ 10:14:32
1.0
2.0
5.0
0.5
0.2
FIG. 4-51.
In this display notice that the impedance plot has spread out, and is moving in towards the center of the chart.
values for the two TRL parameters.
TRL Z0,Theta ? _
There is a comma separating the two line parameters above, so
type “20, 60” and press <Enter>. For distributed elements,
always type the two values separated by a comma. Fig. 4-51
illustrates the screen display after the ﬁrst TRL has been added.
Type “Y” in response to the question:
Save Element (Y/N) ? _
Note that the on-screen circuit ﬁle has once again been updated.
Now enter the second line, Z0 = 30 ohm TRL.You see the screen
in Fig. 4-52.
The Smith Chart is now getting a bit cluttered, so it is time to
clean it. Type “C” for clean at the “Command ?” prompt. What
will be left is the last trace drawn. Finally, add the last TRL
and look at the ﬁnal results. Type "40,60" when asked; then,
after cleaning the screen once again, you should see the plot in
Fig. 4-53.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Software Design Tools
VSWR: 1.5
System Z0: 50 ohms
Data File: TRL3
Freq 
VSWR
2000.0 
51.892 11.703 
1.261
2333.0 
34.000 14.775 
1.686
2667.0 
24.978 
8.088 
2.871
3000.0 
22.500 
0.000 
2.222
Command ? _
Ckt: \16(30,60)\16(20,60\Load
03-19-2005 @ 10:19:51
1.0
2.0
5.0
0.5
0.2
FIG. 4-52.
The second quarter-wave TRL caused the trace to ﬂip, end for end, and you are now closer to chart center at the low end of the band.
VSWR: 1.5
System Z0: 50 ohms
Data File: TRL3
Freq 
VSWR
2000.0 
28.359 
4.877 
1.780 
2333.0 
30.549 
11.797 
1.776
2667.0 
48.310 
22.224 
1.568 
3000.0 
71.111 
0.000 
1.422
Command ? _
Ckt: \16(40,60)\16(30,60)\16(20,60\Load
03-19-2005 @ 10:24:16
1.0
2.0
5.0
0.5
0.2
FIG. 4-53.
Note in this ﬁgure that the last quarter-wave section again ﬂipped the trace end for end. Save this last element so that the on-screen circuit
ﬁle will be updated and look like the plot shown here.
38.885
22.407
12.889
Units: ohms, degrees
Note: Line lengths specified at 3000 Mhz
FIG. 4-54.
2–3 GHz broadband TRL match.
The result is a pretty good ﬁrst-cut match. It is not all that great at
the low end of the band, but it is good enough for tweaking, either
by hand, or via the use of the Microwave Software OptiMatch
program. The 2–3 GHz Broadband TRL Match circuit with the
ﬁnal optimized values is shown in Fig. 4-54.
Integrated Design Tools
Integrated Electronic Design Automation (EDA) software for
designing RF and microwave components and subsystems
provides designers with state-of-the-art performance in a sin-
gle design environment that is fast, powerful and accurate. In
other words, the engineer has access not just to a solution for
impedance matching, but to an entire design environment that
supports a range of functionality to assist the engineer through-
out the RF circuit design process, from initial system architecture
through ﬁnal documentation.
It is important to note that, while these solutions can be quite
effectiveandeasytouse, theydorequirefamiliaritywiththemul-
tiple data inputs that need to be entered and the correct formats.
You will also need some expertise to ﬁnd the useful data among
the tons of results coming out. These types of tools generally
cost on the order of a few thousand dollars and up.
Design Example
As an example, consider the Genesys software platform from
Agilent Technologies (www.agilent.com/ﬁnd/eesof). With ﬁve
different conﬁgurations, it accommodates the range of RF

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
FIG. 4-55.
Start-up dialog showing how to launch MATCH.
tasks that today’s engineers perform. Its impedance matching
synthesis tool, known as MATCH, synthesizes simple quarter-
wave, Pi and Tee networks through general-order Cheby-
shev networks. The tool works with single stage or multiple
stages, non-unilateral devices, and arbitrary terminations and
is well-equipped to ﬁnd solutions for broadband, ill-behaved
terminations.
To better understand how this solution works in comparison to
a point tool like SmithMatch, consider the following example
in which Genesys ﬁrst captures measured data from a vector
network analyzer (VNA) and then performs de-embedding to
extract the actual device parameters. Next, the corrected device
data is incorporated into an ampliﬁer design and MATCH is used
to provide a simultaneous input and output matching structure.
This example focuses primarily on the use of MATCH.
To begin, select the “new ﬁle” icon from the top menu bar. Then
launch the MATCH synthesis tool from the start-up dialog shown
in Fig. 4-55.
After accepting the default naming, the MATCH dialog and asso-
ciated windows like those shown in Fig. 4-56 will appear. The
last conﬁguration used will be displayed as the default menu. On
the Settings tab set the frequency of analysis from 2200 MHz to
2600 MHz and the number of points to 50.
Under the Sections tab deﬁne the termination, input and output
matching structures and the de-embedded device s-parameters
(Fig. 4-57). Forthepurposesofthisexample, theinputandoutput
terminations are 50 ohms (default). From the Sections tab click
on the output port to activate it. Use the Add Device to place the
symbol for our two port de-embedded part. If you select theType
drop down, you will notice that you can reference both a ﬁle and a
sub-network in MATCH. Using the Browse button select the ﬁle
named “Device.s2p” from the working directory. Click on the
default matching structure “LCPi” and select the LC Bandpass
as the input matching structure from the Type drop-down list in
Fig. 4-58. Select the “no transformer” option.
Highlighting the output port again, select theAdd Section button
to add the output matching section. Using the same procedure as
before, select the LC Bandpass with “no transformer” for the
output matching network. Press the Calculate button to enable
Genesys to determine the matching topologies component val-
ues. The initial response and topology is shown in Fig. 4-59.
The optimization default goals are set at −30 dB for input and
output matching. They can be modiﬁed by double clicking on
the optimization icon in the workspace tree and selecting the
Goals tab to modify the matching goals. Additional goals can be
added for noise ﬁgure, gain, etc. For this exercise, however, we
will accept the default goals.
The initial component values have provided a −16 dB (worst
case) match over the 400-MHz bandwidth. To help improve this
response, click on the Optimization button on the Sections tab.
After a few seconds, the optimized match provides the goal stated
−30 dB across the 400-MHz bandwidth (Fig. 4-60).
It should be noted that only devices whose stability factor K is
greater than or equal to one will be successfully matched at both
input and output. When a device shows “conditional” stability,
a trade-off is often required between input or output matching.
An additional feature of the MATCH tool is its ability to set
limits on component parameters. Select the Defaults tab to view
the values for inductor and capacitor Qs as well as the limits on
distributed elements. These settings can also aide you in limiting

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Software Design Tools
FIG. 4-56.
MATCH dialog window.
FIG. 4-57.
In this ﬁgure note that the input and output terminations can be a ﬁxed real impedance, an S/Y/Z parameter ﬁle, or modeled as a complex
termination made up of passive components.
the realizable transmission structures and in placing a limit on
the loss from the lumped components as in Fig. 4-61.
Invariably, optimization provides fractional component values.
Proceeding with the next logical step then, you will need to tune
the component values to the closest standard value. During this
process it may be necessary to make multiple passes in order to
optimize the ﬁnal match.
Select the schematic with the ampliﬁer and matching struc-
ture from this example. Press both “crtl+A” keys to select
all the passive components. Alternately, you can select the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
FIG. 4-58.
Match properties screen shot.
23.1
22.2
21.3
20.4
19.5
18.6
S11, S22 (dB)
17.7
16.8
15.9
2400
2200
2240
2280
2320
2360
2480
2440
2520
2560
2600
Frequency (MHz)
Port 1
Z0500
Port 2
Z0500
C1.55 pF
C3.156 pF
C3.945 pF
L1.34nH
L0.014 nH
C0.18 pF
C0.405 pF
C883.124 pF
L7.578 nH
16dB
FIG. 4-59.
Matching topologies component values calculated by Genesys.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Software Design Tools
2200
2240
2280
2320
2360
2400
2440
2480
2520
2560
2600
Frequency (MHz)
StartOptS11
StartOptS22
S11, S22, StartOpt:S11, StartOpt:S22 (dB)
FIG. 4-60.
Optimized match.
FIG. 4-61.
Limiting the loss from lumped components.
components from the top menu Edit/Select/All selection. From
the Schematic menu selection, follow the menu pick to Make
Components Tunable which will enable tuning for all the com-
ponents on the schematic. The tunable components will now
appear in the Tune window in the workspace as shown in
Fig. 4-62. Ensure the Standard 5% setting is in the tune win-
dow and then attempt to optimize the match to meet the original
requirements. You may tune each of the components using the
FIG. 4-62.
A listing of the tunable components.
mouse wheel when the value is selected or alternately use the
Page Up or Page Down keys.
The results in Fig. 4-63 represent two to three passes of com-
ponent tuning. In this ﬁgure the minimum match was −26 dB
across the band. Note that two of the capacitors are in fractional
picofarad values. For small values of capacitance, an interdigital

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
2200
2240
2280
2320
2360
2400
2440
2480
2520
2560
2600
Frequency (MHz)
StartOptS11
StartOptS22
Original:S11
Original:S22
S11, S22, StartOpt:S11, StartOpt:S22, Original:S11, Original:S22
FIG. 4-63.
Results of optimization.
capacitor might offer a cost-effective alternative. Going back
to the Sections tab of MATCH will allow you to try different
matching structures to try to further improve on the design.
SUMMARY
Impedance matching is not a form of “black magic” but is a step-
by-step, well-understood process that is used to help transfer
maximum power from a source to its load. The impedance-
matching networks can be designed either mathematically,
graphically with the aid of a Smith Chart or via the use of a
range of software design tools. Simpler networks of two and
three elements are usually handled best mathematically, while
networks of four or more elements are very easily handled using
the Smith Chart. Design tools can easily accommodate either
scenario.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C H A P T E R 5
THE TRANSISTOR
at Radio
Frequencies
n Chapter 1, we discussed resistors, capacitors, and induc-
tors, and their behavior at radio frequencies. We found that,
when working at higher frequencies, we could no longer
think of a capacitor as just a capacitor, or an inductor as
a perfect inductor. In fact, each of these components can
be represented by an equivalent circuit that indicates just how
imperfect that component really is.
In this chapter, we will ﬁnd that the transistor, too, is an imperfect
device whose characteristics also vary with frequency. There-
fore, the equivalent circuit for a typical transistor is introduced
and analyzed. Then, with the aid of the equivalent circuit, the
input, output, feedback, and gain characteristics are described.
We will then examineY and S parameters and take a look at how
manufacturers typically present the transistor’s characteristics
on their data sheets.
Transistor-level design remains an important part of RF design,
even though today’s analog and RF engineers live in a world
of “connect the IC boxes.” There are a number of key reasons
why transistor level design—while it may be more difﬁcult and
require more time than merely connected IC modules—can be
well worth the extra effort. Some of these reasons include:
1. Exploration of design options—Working at the transistor
level allows the engineer to explore all possible design
options at a powerful device level.
2. Methodologies—The engineer can take advantage of
emerging automated design tools and methodologies to
speed the design process and make it much more
effective.
3. Results—Putting in the higher level of effort required to
work at the transistor level is compensated for by
allowing the engineer to really push the envelope of
speed and power and to take advantage of design reuse.
The topics of design and design tools will be addressed in future
chapters.
RF TRANSISTOR MATERIALS
Transistors are used to make all the necessary RF components,
from low noise ampliﬁers (LNA) to high power ampliﬁers; from
mixers and oscillators to switches and attenuators, and more.
Further, these RF device transistors are fabricated in a variety
of different ways and with different materials. Each different
material causes the performance of the transistor to change in
subtle—and not so subtle—ways.
Therearetwobasicfabricationmethodsfortransistorsusedinthe
RF space: bipolar junction transistors (BJTs) or simply bipolars,
and ﬁeld effect transistors (FETs). The main difference is that
bipolars have abrupt junctions in the semiconductor material and
FET’s do not (see Fig. 5-1).
Instead, FETs have a gate element that creates an electromag-
netic ﬁeld when charged. This gate changes the conductivity of
Source
Drain
Transistor
Bipolar
Transistor
Emitter
Collector
Base
FIG. 5-1.
Schematic representation of FET and BJT.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
the channel, thus turning the transistor off or on. Once the gate
on a FET has been charged, no additional power (really, current)
is needed to keep the transistor on (or closed). This means that
FETs are voltage-controlled devices.
By comparison, a bipolar transistor is current controlled and
requires a small amount of current ﬂowing through the transis-
tor to keep it on. Though small, this current for a single bipolar
transistor can quickly add up if you have millions of such tran-
sistors on a chip. For this reason, FET-based silicon chips use
less power than bipolars. The main disadvantage of FETs is that
they switch a little slower than bipolar devices.
RF designers use a variety of power transistors,
includ-
ing: lateral-diffused (LD) MOSFETs, gallium-arsenide (GaAs)
metal-semiconductor FETs (MESFETs), GaAs/InGaP hetero-
junction bipolar transistors (HBTs), gallium-nitride (GaN)
high-electron-mobilitytransistors(HEMTs), andsilicon-carbide
(SiC) FETs.
THE TRANSISTOR EQUIVALENT CIRCUIT
Just as resistors, capacitors, and inductors can be modeled by an
equivalent circuit at radio frequencies, transistor behavior can
also be best described by such a circuit as shown in Fig. 5-2.
This is a common-emitter conﬁguration of the equivalent circuit
known as the hybrid-π model.At ﬁrst glance, the hybrid-π model
looks to be quite formidable for analysis purposes. After deﬁn-
ing each component of the model, however, some simplifying
assumptions will be made to aid in the analysis process.
rbb′—Base spreading resistance. This is an inevitable
resistance that occurs at the junction between the base
terminal or contact and the semiconductor material that
composes the base. Its value is usually in the tens of
ohms. Smaller transistors tend to exhibit larger values
of rbb′.
rb′e—Input resistance. The resistance that occurs at the
base-emitter junction of a forward-biased transistor.
Typical values range around 1000 ohms.
rb′c—Feedback resistance. This is a very large (≈5 megohm)
resistance appearing from the base to the collector of the
transistor.
rbc
bIB
rbb
rbe
FIG. 5-2.
Transistor equivalent circuit—common-emitter conﬁguration.
rce—Output resistance. As the name implies, this is simply the
resistance seen looking back into the collector of the
transistor. A value for a typical transistor would be about
100K.
Ce—Emitter diffusion capacitance. This capacitance is really
the sum of the emitter diffusion capacitance and the
emitter junction capacitance, both of which are
associated with the physics of the semiconductor
junction itself and which is beyond the scope of this
book. It does exist, however, and since the junction
capacitance is so small, Ce is usually called diffusion
capacitance with a typical value of 100 pF.
Cc—Feedback capacitance. This component is formed at the
reverse-biased collector-to-base junction of the transistor.
As the frequency of operation for the transistor increases,
Cc can begin to have a very pronounced effect on
transistor operation. A typical value for this component
might be 3 pF.
Also shown in Fig. 5-2 is a current source of value βIB′. Beta (β)
is, of course, the small-signal ac current gain of the transistor
while IB′ is the current through rb′e. The current source can be
thought of as simply an indication of current ﬂow in the collector
that is dependent upon the current that ﬂows in the base of the
transistor. Therefore, the collector current is equal to the base
current times the β of the transistor, or Ic = βIB′.
Keep in mind that Fig. 5-2 depicts only those inherent para-
sitic elements that are internal to the semiconductor material
itself. Somehow, however, a connection has to be made from
the semiconductor material to the transistor leads. This is done
with a minute piece of wire called a bonding wire, which, at
high frequencies, adds a bit of inductance to the equivalent cir-
cuit. The transistor leads themselves tend to exhibit additional
series inductance and the equivalent circuit begins to resemble
that of Fig. 5-3, where LB, LE, and LC are the base, emitter, and
collector lead and bonding inductance, respectively.
It certainly should be obvious now that the equivalent circuit for
a typical transistor is not trivial, but contains numerous com-
ponents, all of which will affect the device’s operation at high
rbc
rbb
rbe
bIB
FIG. 5-3.
An equivalent circuit including lead inductance.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Transistor Equivalent Circuit
frequency to a certain degree. If some simplifying assumptions
aremade, however, weshouldbeabletousetheequivalentcircuit
to determine how the transistor behaves at radio frequencies.
Input Impedance
One of the ﬁrst simpliﬁcations that can be made to the circuit of
Fig. 5-3 is to eliminate rb′c. Five megohms is, after all, a rather
large resistance and, for our purposes, looks like an open circuit.
The next step is to use a principle called the Miller effect to trans-
pose Cc from its series base-to-collector connection to a position
that is in parallel with Ce, with a new value of (Cc)(1 −βRL),
where RL is the load resistance. This capacitance is then com-
bined with Ce toforma newtotalcapacitance, CT. Thesechanges
are shown in Fig. 5-4.
The input impedance variation over frequency for a transistor
is very easily found by analyzing the circuit of Fig. 5-5. Here
we have included only the elements of the equivalent circuit that
have an effect on the transistor’s input impedance. Notice that
the primary contributors are rb′e and CT—neither of which the
designer has any control over. The quantity rbb′, on the other
hand, is a very small resistance while LB and LE can vary in
size depending on circuit layout. If you are very careful, LB and
LE can be limited practically to the bonding inductance that was
mentioned previously. If this is the case, these elements will have
practically no effect on input impedance until well above very
high frequencies (VHF).
If we begin our analysis at DC, the circuit of Fig. 5-5 reduces
to rbb′ in series with rb′e and the input impedance is a pure
resistance and is at its maximum value. As the frequency of
bIB
rbb
rbe
FIG. 5-4.
An equivalent circuit using the Miller effect.
rbb
rbe
FIG. 5-5.
Equivalent input impedance.
operation increases, however, CT begins to play an increasingly
important role. Its shunting effect (around rb′e) tends to reduce
the impedance considerably, until at high frequencies, it effec-
tively eliminates rb′e from the circuit. When this occurs, rbb′, LB,
and LE become the major contributors to the transistor’s input
impedance.
The impedance looking into the terminals of Fig. 5-5 can be
described as follows:
Zin = jωLB + rbb′ +
jωCT (rb′e)
jωCT+rb′e
+ jωLE
= jω(LB + LE) + rbb′ +
rb′e
1 + rb′ejωCT
= jωLT + rbb′ +
rb′e
1 + jωrb′eCT
This equation is plotted on the Smith Chart shown in Fig. 5-6
with the following values inserted into the equation.
LT = 20 nH
rb′e = 1000 ohms
rbb′ = 50 ohms
CT = 100 pF
Notice that the chart is normalized for convenience. The actual
input impedance of the hypothetical transistor is 1050 ohms at
DC and 50 ohms at 112 MHz. Therefore, to ﬁnd the actual
impedance of this transistor at any frequency, simply multiply
the value found on the chart by 100.
The impedance is presented on the Smith Chart for two reasons.
First, and most obvious, is for practice and, second, because of
the ease with which both impedance and admittance can be read
from the chart at a glance. Most manufacturers, as you will see,
use admittance parameters rather than impedance parameters
to describe transistor characteristics on their data sheets. This
can sometimes be confusing to the designer who is not used to
working with admittances. However, you will soon be handling
both impedance and admittance information equally well.
Output Impedance
The output impedance of a transistor typically decreases with
frequency. Let’s go back to the original circuit of Fig. 5-2 to see
why. We can manipulate Fig. 5-2 in much the same manner as
was done in the last section, and can arrive at a convenient circuit
thatwillbeusefulforanoutputimpedanceanalysis. Lookinginto
the collector terminal, the ﬁrst component quantity that we see
is rce, which has a typical value of 100K. This resistance is very
large in comparison to the other components in the network and
can usually be ignored. The same thing can be said for rb′c. This
leaves us with the circuit of Fig. 5-7.
The ﬁrst inclination in an analysis of this circuit would be to
assume that Cc and Ce are the determining factors in any out-
put impedance calculation and that they alone cause the output
impedance to decrease with frequency. Although Cc and Ce do
have an effect on the output impedance of the device, there is

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
FIG. 5-6.
Input impedance vs. frequency. For a more detailed full color view of this ﬁgure, please visit our companion site at
http://books.elsevier.com/companions/9780750685184.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Transistor Equivalent Circuit
rbb
Zout
rbe
FIG. 5-7.
Equivalent output impedance.
another mechanism that is not so obvious that also has quite an
effect. This can best be understood if we assume that the tran-
sistor is in operation and that some of the collector signal is
being fed back to the base through Cc. When this occurs, some
of the signal voltage being fed back appears across rb′e caus-
ing current to ﬂow in the resistor. This current ﬂow in the base
region is ampliﬁed by the β of the transistor, thus increasing the
collector current. The increase in collector current appears as
a decrease in collector impedance. Therefore, even though Cc
and Ce act to reduce the output impedance level of the transistor
through a decrease in their capacitive reactances, there is also a
hidden element which tends to further decrease the impedance
level beyond that which you would ordinarily expect to ﬁnd by
just looking at the equivalent circuit. Any changes in an exter-
nal source resistance (Rs) will also change Zout. Increasing Rs
decreases Zout because more of the signal current being fed back
is forced through rb′e.
Feedback Characteristics
The feedback components of the transistor equivalent circuit that
is shown in Fig. 5-2 are rb′e and Cc. Of the two, Cc is the most
important since it is the element whose value changes with fre-
quency. The quantity rb′e, on the other hand, is very large and
constantandcontributes verylittletothefeedbackcharacteristics
of the device.
As the frequency of operation for a transistor increases, Cc
becomes more and more important to the circuit designer
because, of course, its reactance is decreasing. Thus, more and
more of the collector signal is fed back to the base. At low
frequencies, the feedback is usually not much of a problem
because Cc, coupled with other stray capacitances located in and
around the circuit or circuit-board area, is usually not enough to
cause instability. At high frequencies, however, stray reactances
coupled with Cc could act to produce a 180◦phase shift from
collector to base in the fed-back signal. This 180◦phase shift,
when added to the 180◦phase shift that is produced in the nor-
mal signal inversion from base-to-collector during ampliﬁcation,
could turn an ampliﬁer into an oscillator very quickly.
Another problem associated with the internal feedback of the
transistor is the fact that the collector circuitry is not truly isolated
from the base circuitry. Thus, any change in the load resistance
of the collector circuitry directly affects the input impedance of
the transistor. Or, similarly, any change in the source resistance
Frequency
6 dB/octave
Power Gain (dB)
fmax
FIG. 5-8.
Typical power gain vs. frequency curve.
in the base circuitry directly affects the output impedance of the
transistor. This malady is especially important to consider when
you are trying to perform an impedance match on both the input
and the output of the transistor simultaneously. If, for example,
you ﬁrst match the transistor’s input impedance to the source and
then match the load to the transistor’s output impedance, the out-
put matching network will cause the transistor’s input impedance
to change from its original value. Therefore, the input matching
network is no longer valid and must be redesigned. Once you
redesign the input matching network, however, this impedance
change will reﬂect through to the collector causing an output
impedance change which invalidates the output matching net-
work. Therefore, if you totally ignore the feedback components
in the transistor’s equivalent circuit when designing impedance
matching networks, you will not obtain a perfect match for the
transistor. Nevertheless, if Cc is small, the match at both the
input and the output might be tolerable in many cases.
It should be pointed out that there is a method for performing a
simultaneous conjugate match on a transistor while taking into
account the effects of Cc. This method is covered in detail in
Chapter 6.
Gain
The gain that we are normally interested in for RF transistors
is the power gain of the device, rather than just the voltage or
current gain. It is power gain that is important because of the myr-
iad of impedance levels which abound in RF circuitry. When an
impedance level changes in a circuit, voltage and current gains
alone no longer mean anything. Even a passive device can pro-
duce a voltage or current gain but it cannot produce both simul-
taneously. That is what transistors are for—to produce real gain.
The power gain of a transistor typically resembles a curve similar
to that shown in Fig. 5-8. This curve is not at all surprising if
you again consider the equivalent transistor circuit of Fig. 5-4.
Notice that what we have, in effect, is an RC low-pass ﬁlter with
a gain which must fall off (neglecting lead inductance) at the
rate of 6 dB per octave. The maximum frequency at which the
transistor provides a power gain is labeled as fmax in the diagram.
The gain curve passes through fmax at 0 dB (gain = 1), and at the
rate of 6 dB per octave.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
30.00 m
20.00 m
10.00 m
0.00
0.00
1.25
2.50
Vce (V)
3.75
5.00
lc (mA)
FIG. 5-9.
Transistor’s characteristic curves.
Gain is usually classiﬁed as either unilateralized, neutralized, or
unneutralized. Unilateralized power gain is deﬁned as the gain
available from the transistor when the effects of both feedback
components (rb′c and Cc) are negated. Remember that rb′c and
Cc are providing negative feedback internal to the transistor and,
thus, decrease the gain of the device. Eliminating the negative
feedback increases the gain of the transistor. Neutralized power
gain is that gain which occurs when only the feedback capaci-
tance (Cc) is negated or neutralized. Unneutralized gain, on the
other hand, occurs when neither feedback component is com-
pensated for. Of the three, the unilateralized ampliﬁer produces
the most gain and the unneutralized ampliﬁer produces the least.
The difference in power gains between the unilateralized case
and the neutralized case is usually so small as to be negligible.
Thus, neutralization is usually sufﬁcient.
Neutralization is accomplished by providing external feedback
from the collector to the base of the transistor at just the right
amplitude and phase to exactly cancel the internal negative
feedback. Further details on this are provided in Chapter 6.
Transistor as a Switch
Before we go further, a quick word is in order about the use
of transistors as switches, since several other chapters deal
with transistors as ampliﬁers. Most electronic components and
devices can’t source enough power to operate. Transistors, when
used as a switch, have the unique capability of allowing large
amounts of current ﬂow, all of which is controlled by a very small
change in junction voltage—so long as the ground between the
transistor and the rest of the circuit is the same.
When a bipolar transistor is used in any circuit, be it as a switch
or ampliﬁer, its function is determined by the device’s set of
characteristic curves (see Figure 5-9). The output characteristic
curves determine the range of output voltage (collector-emitter
voltage or Vce) for different collector current, Ic. If the transistor
is to be used as an ampliﬁer, then biasing is selected so that the
linear part of the output curves—the almost horizontal sections)
areused. Butifthetransistoristobeusedasaswitch, thenbiasing
is selected to operate on regions of the output curve known as
saturation and cut-off.
In the cut-off region, the operating conditions of the transistor
are zero input base current, zero output collector current and
maximum (determined by the supply rail) collector voltage. In
this state, the transistor acts like a switch in the off position, with
no current ﬂowing through the output. In the saturation region,
the transistor is biased so that the maximum amount of base
current is applied. This operating condition results in a maximum
collector current ﬂow and minimum collector emitter voltage.
Here, the transistor is operating as a switch in the on position.
In both cut-off and saturation, minimum power is dissipated in
the transistor.
Put simply, the base (B) of the transistor (see Figure 5-10) acts
like the on/off switch. If a current is ﬂowing to the base, then a
path will exist for current to ﬂow from the collector (C) to the
emitter (E)—in other words, the “switch” is on. If there is no
current ﬂowing to the base, then no current path exists between
the collector and emitter—or the “switch” is off.
MEMs as a Switch
Another way to make a switch is with old fashion relays, as
opposed to transistors. But using today’s latest semiconduc-
tor materials and technology, these old fashion relays take on
a whole new meaning.
Microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) technology is start-
ing to impact the design of RF front ends through the increasing
availability of practical MEMS-based components, such as RF
switches. MEMS technology essentially involves the fabrica-
tion of mechanical structures, such as a variable capacitor or
a switch, by means of a semiconductor process. In a switch, for
example, these resulting nanostructures can achieve extremely
high levels of off-state isolation through the physical separa-
tion of switch ports. In a variable capacitor, the use of MEMS
technology makes it possible to achieve the wide capacitance
tuning range of a mechanically trimmed capacitor, but with the
programmable control of an electronically adjustable device.
MEMS technology is still at a fairly early stage of adoption
within RF front-end designs. The technology is perhaps most
closely associated with the accelerometer sensors found in many
automotive air-bag electronic systems. Heavily ﬁnanced by mil-
itary research dollars, MEMS is viewed as a possible compact
solution for the switched channel ﬁlters common to military
tactical radios, allowing a considerably reduction in size and
weight in manpack designs compared to current switched-ﬁlter
solutions.
Availability of MEMS-based variable capacitors and inductors,
for example, also opens up the possibility of new approaches
to RF front-end designs, with opportunities for programmable
rather than ﬁxed preselector and IF ﬁlters. In addition, the
capability of electronically changing the impedance at different
circuit junctions with a MEMS device suggests the possibility
of electronically tunable antenna matching circuits and ﬁl-
ter/ampliﬁer matching circuits—in essence allowing an RF front

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Y Parameters
24 V
5 V
20 mA
0.6V
5 V
Input
Input 100 k
12 VDC
2.2 k
Ground
Resistor
Transistor
12 V
Switch
FIG. 5-10.
Transistor as a switch.
end to be optimized for a speciﬁc set of operating conditions in
the ﬁeld.
Y PARAMETERS
In Chapter 4, admittance was introduced, with the help of the
Smith Chart, as the reciprocal of impedance. It is expressed
in the form of Y = G ± jB, where G is conductance or the
reciprocal of resistance and B is susceptance or the reciprocal
of reactance. Both G and jB are taken to be parallel compo-
nents as opposed to the series representation (Z = R ± jX) for
impedance.
The admittance parameters of a transistor are simply a tool to
aid in the unambiguous presentation of the characteristics of the
device at a certain frequency and bias point. Or, put another way,
they are a method of indicating to a potential user what the tran-
sistor “looks like” to something connected to its terminals under
certain conditions. Admittance parameters can be used to design
impedance-matching networks for the transistor, to determine its
maximum available gain, and to determine its stability—or lack
thereof. In short, they present a model of the transistor to the
designer so that he may best utilize the device in his particular
application.
The Transistor as a Two-Port Network
The transistor is obviously a three-terminal device consisting of
an emitter, base, and collector. In most applications, however,
one of the terminals is common to both the input and the output
network as shown in Fig. 5-11. In the common-emitter conﬁg-
uration of Fig. 5-11A, for instance, the emitter is grounded and
is thus common to both the input and the output network. So,
Input
Port
Input
Port
Input
Port
Output
Port
Output
Port
Output
Port
(A) Common emitter
(B) Common base
(C) Common collector
FIG. 5-11.
The three-terminal transistor as a two-port network.
rather than describe the device as a three-terminal network, it
is convenient to describe the transistor in a black-box fashion
by calling it a two-port network. One port is described as the
input port and the other as the output port. This is shown in

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
Transistor
FIG. 5-12.
The transistor as a two-port “black box.”
Fig. 5-11. Once the two-port realization is made, the transistor
can be completely characterized by observing its behavior at the
two ports.
Two-Port Y Parameters
Two-port admittance parameters can be used to completely char-
acterize the behavior of a transistor at a certain frequency and
bias point, and are considered to be independent of applied sig-
nal level as long as linear operation is maintained. The black-box
conﬁguration used to create the Y-parameter characterization is
shown in Fig. 5-12.
The short-circuitY parameters for the two-port conﬁguration of
Fig. 5-12 are given by:
yi = I1
V2 = 0
(Eq. 5-1)
yr = I1
V1 = 0
(Eq. 5-2)
yf = I2
V2 = 0
(Eq. 5-3)
yo = I2
V1 = 0
(Eq. 5-4)
where
yi = the short-circuit input admittance,
yr = the short-circuit reverse-transfer admittance,
yf = the short-circuit forward-transfer admittance,
yo = the short-circuit output admittance.
The short circuit that is used to make V1 and V2 equal to zero
is not a DC short circuit, but a short circuit presented at the
signal or test frequency. This is usually accomplished by plac-
ing a large capacitor across the terminal which requires a short.
An examination of Equation 5-1, for instance, reveals that in
order to measure yi in a laboratory, you would ﬁrst have to con-
nect a large capacitor across the output terminals of the device.
This will set V2 equal to zero. Then, a known signal voltage (V1)
is injected into the input port and a measurement of I1 is made.
The ratio of I1 to V1, with their appropriate phase relationships
accounted for, is the short-circuit input admittance of the device,
which is usually a complex number in the form of G ± jB. Simi-
larly, to measure yf , simply leave the short circuit in place, inject
signal voltage V1, and measure I2. The complex ratio of I2 to V1
is the short-circuit transfer admittance. Similar methods are used
to measure yo and yr.
The short circuit is used in the measurement of Y parameters
because of the deﬁnition of the two-port model. Referring to
Fig. 5-12, it is obvious that the current I1 is dependent upon the
voltage (V1) at the input terminals of the device. But, what might
not be so obvious is the fact that I1 is also dependent upon V2.
This is due to the internal feedback (Rb′c and Cc) of the transistor
and it must be accounted for. Stated mathematically:
I1 = yiV1 + yrV2
(Eq. 5-5)
which simply states that I1 is dependent upon the input admit-
tance, the reverse-transfer (feedback) admittance, V1, and V2.
Notice, however, that if we force V2 equal to zero, I1 is totally
dependent upon V1 and the input admittance of the device. Or
stated another way, the input admittance can be found by inject-
ing V1 and measuring I1. A similar argument can be made for yr
if V1 is forced equal to zero in Equation 5-5. The equation for
the output port is
I2 = yf V1 + yoV2
(Eq. 5-6)
Equations 5-3 and 5-4 can be derived from Equation 5-6 by
alternately setting V1 and V2 equal to zero.
Transistor admittance parameter variations with frequency are
often published by manufacturers toaid thedesignerinhisdesign
efforts. They are extremely useful, but often very difﬁcult to mea-
sure, especially at high frequency. The difﬁculty arises at high
frequencies mainly due to the fact that a good short circuit is
difﬁcult to obtain. As we learned in Chapter 1, a capacitor at
high frequencies is not a short circuit at all, but presents some
reactance at the operating frequency. Obviously, if any reactance
creeps into the “short circuit,” the voltage at the port in question
is no longer zero and our measurement is no longer valid. The
higher the impedance at the “shorted” port, the worse our mea-
surement error becomes. There are, of course, other methods
besides capacitors for producing short circuits at the test fre-
quency. But they are generally cumbersome, tedious, and time-
consuming, and, as such, leave a lot to be desired. Because of the
problems associated with ﬁnding a true short circuit at high fre-
quencies, the trend in recent years has been to characterize higher
frequency transistors in terms of their scattering or S parameters.
S PARAMETERS
Scattering, or S, parameters are another extremely useful design
aid that most manufacturers supply for their higher frequency
transistors. S parameters are becoming more and more widely
used because they are much easier to measure and work with
thanY parameters. They are easy to understand, convenient, and
provide a wealth of information at a glance.
While Y parameters utilize input and output voltages and cur-
rents to characterize the operation of the two-port network, S
parametersusenormalizedincidentandreﬂectedtravelingwaves
at each network port. Furthermore, with S parameters, there
is no need to present a short circuit to the two-port device.
Instead, the network is always terminated in the characteristic
impedance of the measuring system. In the majority of mea-
suring systems, this impedance is 50 ohms (purely resistive).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

S Parameters
Incident Wave
Reflected Wave
FIG. 5-13.
Incident and reﬂected waves on a transmission line.
The 50-ohm termination requirement is much easier to control
than the short-circuit Y-parameter requirement, thus facilitating
measurement. In addition, the 50-ohm source and load seen by
the two-port network generally forces the device under test, if
active, to be stable and not oscillate. This is not always true in
a short-circuit measuring system where an active device often
does not want to see a short circuit applied to one of its ports.
Often such a termination would cause an active device, such
as a transistor, to become unstable, thus making measurements
impossible. S parameters, therefore, are usually much easier for
the manufacturer to measure and, because they are also con-
ceptually easy to understand, are widely used in the design of
transistor ampliﬁers and oscillators.
Transmission Line Background
In order to understand the concept of S parameters, it is neces-
sary to ﬁrst have a working knowledge of some very simpliﬁed
transmission line theory. The mathematics have been extensively
discussed in the many references cited at the end of the book
(Bibliography) and will not be covered here. Instead, you should
try to gain an intuitive feel for the incident and reﬂected traveling
waves in a transmission line system.
As shown in Fig. 5-13, voltage, current, or power emanating
from a source impedance (Zs) and delivered to a load (ZL) can
be considered to be in the form of incident and reﬂected waves
traveling in opposite directions along a transmission line of char-
acteristic impedance (Zo). If the load impedance (ZL) is exactly
equal to Zo, the incident wave is totally absorbed in the load
and there is no reﬂected wave. If, on the other hand, ZL differs
from Zo, some of the incident wave is not absorbed in the load
but is reﬂected back toward the source. If the source impedance
Zs were equal to Zo, the reﬂected wave from the load would be
absorbed in the source and no further reﬂections would occur.
Of course, for a Zs not equal to Zo, a portion of the reﬂected
wave from the load is re-reﬂected from the source back toward
the load and the entire process repeats itself perpetually (for a
lossless transmission line). The degree of mismatch between Zo,
and ZL, or Zs, determines the amount of the incident wave that
is reﬂected. The ratio of the reﬂected wave to the incident wave
is known as the reﬂection coefﬁcient and is simply a measure of
the quality of the match between the transmission line and the
terminating impedances. The reﬂection coefﬁcient is a complex
quantity expressed as a magnitude and an angle in polar form.
	 = reﬂection coefﬁcient
= Vreﬂected
Vincident
= ρ∠θ
(Eq. 5-7)
As the match between the characteristic impedance of the trans-
mission line and the terminating impedances improves, the
reﬂected wave becomes smaller. Therefore, using Equation 5-7,
the reﬂection coefﬁcient decreases. When a perfect match exists,
there is no reﬂected wave and the reﬂection coefﬁcient is zero. If
the load impedance, on the other hand, is an open or short circuit,
none of the incident power can be absorbed in the load and all of it
must be reﬂected back toward the source. In this case, the reﬂec-
tion coefﬁcient is equal to 1, or a perfect mismatch. Thus, the
normal range of values for the magnitude of the reﬂection coef-
ﬁcient is between zero and one. The reason normal is stressed
is that in order for the reﬂection coefﬁcient to be greater than
one, the magnitude of the reﬂected wave from a load impedance
must be greater than the magnitude of the incident wave to that
load. In order for that to occur, it follows that the load in question
must be a source of power. This concept is useful in the design of
oscillators, but reﬂection coefﬁcients that are greater than unity,
in the input networks of ampliﬁers, are very bad news.
As we learned in Chapter 4, the reﬂection coefﬁcient can be
expressed in terms of the impedances under consideration. For
example, the reﬂection coefﬁcient at the load of the circuit shown
in Fig. 5-13 can be expressed as:
	 = ZL −Zo
ZL + Zo
(Eq. 5-8)
Notice that if ZL is set equal to Zo in Equation 5-8, the reﬂection
coefﬁcient becomes zero. Conversely, setting ZL equal to zero
(a short circuit), the magnitude of the reﬂection coefﬁcient goes
to unity. Thus, Equation 5-8 holds true for the concepts we have
discussed thus far.
Often Equation 5-8 is normalized to the characteristic impedance
of the transmission line. Thus, dividing the numerator and
denominator of Equation 5-8 by Zo, we have:
Zo −1
Zo + 1
= Zn −1
Zn + 1
(Eq. 5-9)
where
Zn is the normalized load impedance.
Equation 5-9 is the same equation that was used in Chapter 4
to develop the Smith Chart. In fact, you will ﬁnd that reﬂec-
tion coefﬁcients may be plotted directly on the Smith Chart,
and the corresponding load impedance read off of the chart
immediately—without the need for any calculation using Equa-
tions 5-8 or 5-9. The converse is also true. Given a speciﬁc char-
acteristic impedance of a transmission line and a load impedance,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
the reﬂection coefﬁcient can be read directly from the chart. No
calculation is necessary. Example 5-1 illustrates this fact.
The construction performed in Example 5-1 should take less than
30 seconds once you become familiar with the chart. Obviously,
an alternate solution would have been to use Equation 5-8 or
5-9 and perform the computation mathematically. Without the
aid of a good scientiﬁc calculator to perform the complex num-
ber manipulation, however, the numerical computation becomes
both tedious and time-consuming. That is the reason Mr. Smith
developed the chart in the ﬁrst place—to perform the transfor-
mation between impedance and reﬂection coefﬁcient, and vice
versa, without the need for complex number manipulation.
To ﬁnd the impedance that gives a certain value of reﬂection
coefﬁcient in a normalized system, you would simply perform
the reverse of the construction given in Example 5-1. These
procedures are outlined as follows:
1. Draw a line from the center of the chart to the angle of
the given reﬂection coefﬁcient. The normalized
impedance is located somewhere along that line.
2. From the voltage-reﬂection coefﬁcient scale located at
the bottom of the chart, transfer the value for distance
(d), corresponding to the magnitude of the reﬂection
coefﬁcient, to the line drawn in Step 1. Plot this point for
a distance (d) from the center of the chart along the line
drawn in Step 1.
3. The normalized impedance at the point plotted in Step 2
is then read directly from the chart just as any other
impedance would be read.
S Parameters and the Two-Port Network
Let us now insert a two-port network between the source and
the load in the circuit of Fig. 5-13. This yields the circuit of
Fig. 5-16. The following may be said for any traveling wave that
originates at the source:
1. A portion of the wave originating from the source and
incident upon the two-port device (a1) will be reﬂected
(b1) and another portion will be transmitted through the
two-port device.
2. A fraction of the transmitted signal is then reﬂected from
the load and becomes incident upon the output of the
two-port device (a2).
3. A portion of the signal (a2) is then reﬂected from the
output port back toward the load (b2), while a fraction is
transmitted through the two-port device back to the
source.
It is obvious from the above discussion that any traveling wave
present in the circuit of Fig. 5-16 is made up of two components.
For instance, the total traveling-wave component ﬂowing from
the output of the two-port device to the load is actually made
up of that portion of a2 which is reﬂected from the output of
the two-port device, plus that portion of a1 that is transmitted
through the two-port device. Similarly, the total traveling wave
ﬂowing from the input of the two-port device back toward the
source is made up of that portion of a1 that is reﬂected from
EXAMPLE 5-1
What is the load reﬂection coefﬁcient for the circuit
shown in Fig. 5-14?
Zo  50 Ω
100  j75 Ω
FIG. 5-14.
Transmission line circuit for Example 5-1.
Solution
The ﬁrst step is to normalize the load impedance so that
you may plot it on a Smith Chart as was done in
Chapter 4. In this case, however, since we are dealing with
transmission lines, you must normalize the chart to the
characteristic impedance of the line rather than just some
convenient number.
ZL = 100 + j75
= 2 + j1.5
Plot this point on the chart as shown in Fig. 5-15. Draw a
line from the center of the chart through the point
2 + j1.5 and extend this line to the outside edge of the
chart (which is calibrated in degrees). Note that for clarity,
all extraneous scales normally shown around the periphery
of the chart have been eliminated. The reﬂection
coefﬁcient can now be read directly from the chart. The
distance from the center of the chart to the point
Z = 2 + j1.5 is equal to the magnitude of the reﬂection
coefﬁcient. To ﬁnd its numerical value, simply transfer this
distance (d) to the voltage-reﬂection coefﬁcient scale
located at the bottom of the Smith Chart. This yields a
value of 0.54 for the magnitude. To ﬁnd the angle in
degrees, simply read the angle at the intersection of
the previously constructed line and the outside edge of
the chart. This angle is approximately 29.7◦. Thus, the
load-reﬂection coefﬁcient for a load impedance of
100 + j75 ohms in a 50-ohm system is:
0.54∠29.7◦
Continued on next page

--- PAGE BREAK ---

S Parameters
EXAMPLE 5-1—Cont
FIG. 5-15.
Solution to Example 5-1. For a more detailed full color view of this ﬁgure, please visit our companion site at
http://books.elsevier.com/companions/9780750685184.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
the input port plus that fraction of a2 that is transmitted through
the two-port device.
If we set these observations in equation form, just as was done
for the Y parameters, we get the following:
b1 = S11a1 + S12a2
(Eq. 5-10)
b2 = S21a1 + S22a2
(Eq. 5-11)
where,
S11 = the input reﬂection coefﬁcient,
S12 = the reverse transmission coefﬁcient,
S21 = the forward transmission coefﬁcient,
S22 = the output reﬂection coefﬁcient.
Notice, in Equation 5-10, that if we set a2 equal to zero, then,
S11 = b1
a2 = 0
(Eq. 5-12)
which is a reﬂected wave divided by an incident wave and, there-
fore, by deﬁnition, is equal to the input reﬂection coefﬁcient
studied previously. Thus, S11 can be plotted on a Smith Chart
and the input impedance of the two-port device can be found
immediately.
Similarly, using Equation 5-11,
S22 = b2
a1 = 0
(Eq. 5-13)
This is also a reﬂection coefﬁcient and can be plotted on a Smith
Chart. Thus, the output impedance of the two-port device can
also be found immediately.
The other two S parameters are found as follows:
S21 = b2
a2 = 0
(Eq. 5-14)
S12 = b1
a1 = 0
(Eq. 5-15)
Notice that Equations 5-12 through 5-15 all require that a1 or a2
be set equal to zero in order to measure the individual S param-
eters. This is easily done by forcing Zs and ZL to be equal to the
characteristic impedance of the measuring system. Therefore,
any wave that is incident upon Zs or ZL is totally absorbed and
none is reﬂected back toward the two-port device. For example,
let’s consider the measurement of the input reﬂection coefﬁcient,
S11. Ideally, we would like to provide an input signal to the two-
port device and measure only that fraction of the input signal
that is reﬂected back toward the source. In a practical situa-
tion, however, some of the incident signal is transmitted through
the two-port device, reﬂected (a2) from load impedance, and,
then, reverse transmitted through the two-port device back to
the source. The measured reﬂected signal is then an aggregate
consisting of that portion of a1, which is reﬂected, and that por-
tion of a2, which is transmitted. Obviously, this is not what we
need. If ZL is set equal to Zo, however, then there is no reﬂection
from the load and the measured reﬂected signal from the input
port, divided by the signal incident upon that port, is truly the
input reﬂection coefﬁcient, S11. Similar arguments can be made
for the other S parameters to be measured. Therefore, to measure
the S parameters of a two-port network, the network is always
terminated (source and load) in the characteristic impedance of
the measuring system, thus eliminating all reﬂections from the
terminations.
The signiﬁcance of S21 and S12, as shown in Equations 5-14 and
5-15, is that they are simply the forward and reverse gain (or
loss) of the two-port network, respectively, when the two-port
device is terminated in the characteristic impedance of the mea-
suring system. These are more meaningful than the equivalent
Y parameters yf and yr, which were previously studied. Param-
eter yf , for instance, is a forward transadmittance and yr is
a reverse transadmittance, neither of which can be intuitively
related to an insertion gain or loss for the two-port network.
S parameters, likeY parameters, are simply a convenient method
of presenting the characteristics of a device to a potential user.
Often, a manufacturer will publish both sets of parameters, along
with their variation over frequency, to give the designer the ﬂex-
ibility of working with the parameters with which he feels more
comfortable. There will come a time, however, when you will
be given only one set of parameters and, as things usually go, it
will be the wrong set. If you ever run into this problem, simply
refer to the following conversion formulas:
1. S11 = (1 −yi)(1 + yo) + yryf
(1 −yi)(1 + yo) −yryf
2. S12 =
−2yr
(1 + yi)(1 + yo) −yryf
3. S21 =
−2yf
(1 + yi)(1 + yo) −yryf
4. S22 = (1 + yi)(1 −yo) + yf yr
(1 + yi)(1 + yo) −yryf
5. yi = (1 + S22)(1 −S11) + S12S21
(1 + S11)(1 + S22) −S12S21
6. yr =
−2S12
(1 + S11)(1 + S22) −S12S21
7. yf =
−2S21
(1 + S11)(1 + S22) −S12S21
8. yo = (1 + S11)(1 −S22) + S12S21
(1 + S22)(1 + S11) −S12S21
Notice that if you are converting from Y to S parameters, as in
the ﬁrst four formulas, each individualY parameter must ﬁrst be
multiplied by Zo before being substituted into the equations.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Understanding RF Transistor Data Sheets
Input
Output
Two Port
FIG. 5-16.
Incident and reﬂected waves for a two-port device.
UNDERSTANDING RF TRANSISTOR
DATA SHEETS
The RF transistor data sheet is only a bit more complex than
that of its low-frequency counterpart. In addition to all of the
low-frequency information normally provided on a transistor
data sheet, the transistor’s RF characteristics, in the form of Y
parameters and S parameters and other related information, are
included as well. It is assumed that you are already familiar with
the low-frequency portion of the data sheet. Therefore, we will
concern ourselves only with that information that is typically
added speciﬁcally for RF transistors.
Fig. 5-17 is a data sheet for the Freescale (formerly the Semi-
conductor Product Section of Motorola) 2N5179 npn silicon RF
high-frequency transistor. This particular transistor was chosen
simply because the data sheet provides bothY and S parameters
and is, therefore, very good for instructional use.
One of the ﬁrst things you might notice about this particular
transistor is that it has four leads! The extra lead is not connected
internally to the device itself, but is connected to the case which
just happens to be a metal can. In normal circuit operation, the
extra pin is grounded, thus providing a shield around the device
to help reduce unwanted stray ﬁelds.
The ﬁrst page of the data sheet is fairly straightforward and
provides the never-exceed ratings for the transistor. This is
a common practice even for low-frequency transistors and is
nothing new. Notice that this manufacturer does list those
applications for which the transistor is well-suited. This par-
ticular device was designed for high-gain, low-noise ampliﬁer,
oscillator, and mixer applications.
On page 2 of the data sheet, under the heading Dynamic Char-
acteristics, several parameters of interest to the RF designer are
listed.
fT—This is called the transition frequency, or more commonly,
the gain bandwidth product of the device. fT is the
theoretical frequency at which the common-emitter
current gain (hfe) of the transistor is unity or 0 dB.
Very rarely is fT used in the RF ampliﬁer-design process except
to verify how close you might be to the transistor’s upper fre-
quency limit. Keep in mind that fT is only an indication of the
frequency at which the current gain of the device drops to 0
dB. Power gain may still be possible depending upon the avail-
able voltage gain from the device at the frequency in question.
Usually fT is not measured directly for very high-frequency tran-
sistors, but is extrapolated from data taken at lower frequencies.
The accuracy of the measurement is, therefore, somewhat ques-
tionable and, as one manufacturer has stated, fT is provided on
the data sheets simply for historical reasons.
Ccb—This is the collector-to-base capacitance of the transistor
as measured at 1 MHz with a collector-to-base voltage of
10 volts and the emitter open-circuited.
The smaller this capacitance is, the better off you will be, if
you are using the transistor in an ampliﬁer conﬁguration. This
capacitance can be equated to Cc in the transistor equivalent
circuit of Fig. 5-1 at the beginning of this chapter.
hfe—This is the common-emitter current gain or beta of the
transistor at the speciﬁed low frequency of 1 kHz.
For an RF circuit design, hfe will not do you much good either.
The DC beta of the transistor (hFE), however, will provide you
with needed information in controlling the DC collector or bias
current. This parameter is listed under the On Characteristics
heading for the device (on the second page).
rb′Cc—The collector-to-base time constant for the transistor is
another measure of its feedback characteristics.
The smaller this number is, the better off you will be. This is
another bit of information that is often ignored.
NF—The noise ﬁgure of the transistor is simply a measure of
how much noise the transistor adds to the signal during
the ampliﬁcation process (see Noise Calculations at:
http://books.elsevier.com/companions/9780750685184).
Notice that for these data sheets, a maximum noise ﬁgure
of 4.5 dB was measured for the device under a very rigid
set of conditions.
Figure 1, on page 3 of the data sheet, was used for the noise ﬁg-
ure measurement with the transistor biased at a VCE of 6 volts,
IC = 1.5 mA, and the source resistance set equal to 50 ohms.
This method of presenting the NF for a transistor, as you can
well imagine, is practically useless. Very rarely will the circuit
designer ever see the transistor under this exact set of operat-
ing conditions. Any variation from these conditions changes the
measured noise ﬁgure drastically. For this reason, the manufac-
turer often provides a few noise ﬁgure contours which present NF
graphically under a wide variety of operating conditions. These
contours are shown in Figures 3, 4, and 5 of the data sheet.
Figure 3 is a graph of noise ﬁgure versus frequency. The NF is
measured at various frequencies under the same bias conditions.
Notice, however, that this measurement was taken with a variable
source resistance, where Rs was made equal to its optimum value
for a minimum noise ﬁgure. The concept of an optimum source
resistance for a minimum noise ﬁgure is presented in Chapter 6
of this book. Notice that the minimum noise ﬁgure increases as
the frequency is increased. This is typical of RF transistors.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
NPN RF Transistor
FIG. 5-17.
Data sheet. (Courtesy Freescale (formerly Motorola Semiconductor Products Inc.)).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Understanding RF Transistor Data Sheets
NPN RF Transistor
FIG. 5-17.
(Continued)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
NPN RF Transistor
FIG. 5-17.
(Continued)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Understanding RF Transistor Data Sheets
NPN RF Transistor
FIG. 5-17.
(Continued)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
NPN RF Transistor
FIG. 5-17.
(Continued)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Understanding RF Transistor Data Sheets
NPN RF Transistor
FIG. 5-17.
(Continued)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
Figure 4 on the data sheet is a plot of noise ﬁgure versus both
collector current and source resistance for the transistor at a VCE
of 6 volts and an operating frequency of 105 MHz. It is obvious
from the diagram that there are an inﬁnite number of Rs, Ic com-
binations that will provide you with a speciﬁed noise ﬁgure. For
example, the following combinations of Rs and Ic will provide
you with a 3.5-dB noise ﬁgure:
Ic (mA)
Rs (ohms)
105 or 600
90 or 500
85 or 430
82 or 390
81 or 320
94 or 250
Noticethatforeachvalueofcollectorcurrenttherearetwovalues
of source resistance that will provide the speciﬁed noise ﬁgure.
Obviously, any variation from the intended bias current or source
resistance could change the noise ﬁgure drastically.
Figure 5 is simply another set of contours measured at the
same bias levels but at a different frequency (200 MHz). If you
intended to use the transistor at 300 MHz and wanted to know
what bias current and source resistance to use for a speciﬁc noise
ﬁgure, you would be out of luck. There are no noise contours
provided for that frequency.
Figure 6, on page 4 of the data sheet, is a graph of fT versus
collector current. Optimum fT is obtained at the peak of the
curve which occurs at approximately 12 mA of collector current.
This graph becomes more important at frequencies close to fT,
when you are trying to squeeze every last bit of gain out of
the device that you possibly can. It will indicate the optimum
collector current at which to operate the device. Once the value
of collector current is deﬁned, a sample device could then be
biased accordingly and its Y or S parameters measured so that
the design could proceed.
Figures 7, 8, 9, and 10 are a graphical presentation of the
Y parameters versus frequency for the 2N5179. Measurements
were plotted at VCE = 6 volts and Ic = 1.5 mA. If you prefer a
different set of bias conditions, you will have to measure your
own Y parameters as no other data is provided.
The vertical axis of each diagram is calibrated in millimhos
(mmhos). Therefore, the input admittance (Figure 7) of the
2N5179 at 200 MHz is approximately yi = 2.5 + j7.5 mmhos,
which can be represented by the circuit of Fig. 5-15A. Remem-
ber that positive susceptance (+jB) indicates a shunt capacitor
while negative susceptance (−jB) indicates an inductor. Simi-
larly, the output admittance of the transistor at 200 MHz is read
in Figure 8 as yo = 0.25 + j1.8 mmhos. The equivalent circuit
for this output admittance is shown in Fig. 5-18B. The forward
and reverse transfer admittances for the transistor are given in
Figures 9 and 10, respectively, on the data sheet.
R  1/G
XC  1/B
XC  1/B
 133 Ω
 555.5 Ω
 6 pF
 4 K  1/G
 1.4 pF
(A) Input circuit
(B) Output circuit
 400 Ω
FIG. 5.18.
Equivalent circuit for a 2N5179 (at 200 MHz).
In Chapter 6, you will learn how to apply the givenY parameter
information from data sheets to the design of RF small-signal
ampliﬁers.
Figures 11, 12, 13, 14, and 15 on the data sheet are plots of
the transistor’s S parameters versus frequency at two different
bias levels: VCE = 6.0 volts, Ic = 1.5 mA and VCE = 6.0 volts,
Ic = 5.0 mA. The four plots shown on page 5 of the data sheet
provide S-parameter data in polar form. The radial distance out-
ward from the center of the chart is equal to the magnitude; and
the angle is read along the perimeter of the chart. For example,
the S parameters for the 2N5179 with a bias of VCE = 6 volts,
Ic = 5 mA, at 100 MHz, are:
S11 = 0.65∠309◦
S22 = 0.84∠348◦
S12 = 0.03∠70◦
S21 = 8.2∠123◦
Parameters S21 and S12 are the forward and reverse gain of the
device in magnitude form. To ﬁnd the gain in dB, simply take
the logarithm of the number and multiply it by 20.
S12(dB) = 20 log10 0.03
= −30.5 dB
S21(dB) = 20 log10 8.2
= 18.3 dB
From the preceding calculations, we can deduce that the output
port to input port isolation (S12) of the transistor is very good
at −30.5 dB. Also, the gain of the transistor (S21), when driven
with a 50-ohm source and terminated in a 50-ohm load (even
without impedance matching), is better than 18 dB. Notice that
each gain was calculated as a voltage gain. In actuality, voltage
and power gains are identical in this instance because the input
and the output impedance levels are the same (50 ohms).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Summary
Figure 15 on the last page of the data sheet is another plot of
the input and output reﬂection coefﬁcients of the transistor. This
time, however, a Smith Chart is used. As was stated previously
in this chapter, S11 and S22 are simply reﬂection coefﬁcients and
can be plotted just like any other reﬂection coefﬁcient. Once the
information is plotted, the input and output impedance of the
device can be read directly from the chart.
The chart shown in Figure 15 is a bit different from the charts
we have used thus far in the book. It has been normalized to
50 ohms rather than the usual 1-ohm. Thus, the center of the
chart now represents 50 ± j0 ohms rather than 1 ± j0. This type
of chart normalization is often used when the impedances that
the designer is working with tend to concentrate around a certain
value—in this case, 50 ohms.
The input impedance of the 2N5179 as read from the Smith
Chart, at 100 MHz with a collector current of 5 mA and
VCE = 6 volts, is:
Zin = 48 −j79 ohms
This agrees, within reading accuracy, with the polar plot of
S11 (Figure 11) under the same operating conditions and can
be veriﬁed numerically by plugging S11 in Equation 5-8 for 	
and solving for ZL.
SUMMARY
The transistor is no different from any other component when it
comes to misbehaving at radio frequencies. Like other compo-
nents, the transistor, too, has stray inductance and capacitance
which tends to limit its high-frequency performance. Y and S
parameters were devised as a means of presenting this complex
transistor behavior over frequency with a minimum of effort.
Manufacturers typically present the Y- and S-parameter infor-
mation in the form of data sheets, which should be considered
only as a starting point when used in any RF design task. Man-
ufacturers cannot possibly hope to provide Y- and S-parameter
information at every conceivable bias point and in every pos-
sible circuit conﬁguration. Instead, they usually try to provide
a set of typical operating conditions for the device in question.
Inevitably, however, the day will come when the data sheet pro-
vided with a device is of no use to you whatsoever, and you will
ﬁnd yourself measuring your own parameters and creating your
own data sheets in order to complete a design task.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

This page intentionally left blank 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C H A P T E R 6
SMALL-SIGNAL
RF Ampliﬁer
Design
he design of RF small-signal ampliﬁers is a step-by-
step logical procedure with an exact solution for each
problem. There are many books available on the market
today that offer schematics (complete with parts values)
which are “adaptable to any of your circuit needs.” That
is, a circuit that the author may have designed for a speciﬁc set
of operating conditions is offered and it may or may not meet our
needs. Nonetheless, the design is presented without any design
procedure attached, and the reader is left out in the cold when
he tries to adapt the circuit to his particular set of operating
conditions.
The chapter presented here,
however,
takes the opposite
approach. Detailed step-by-step procedures are followed in the
design process so that you can choose the transistor you want and
use it under any (realistic) operating conditions that you desire.
You will no longer have to adapt someone else’s schematic to
your needs. Rather you will create your own homemade RF
ampliﬁers and optimize them for your personal application.
We will begin our discussion with a very brief overview of
transistor biasing. We will discuss both the bipolar and the ﬁeld-
effect transistor (FET). As was shown in the last chapter, the
quiescent bias point of a transistor has a great effect on itsY and
S parameters. Biasing a transistor is, therefore, serious business
and should not be taken lightly.
Next, we’ll jump head ﬁrst into the RF aspect of ampliﬁers by
examining stability (tendency for oscillation), gain, impedance
matching, and general ampliﬁer design, with emphasis on the
use of Y and S parameters as a design tool
SOME DEFINITIONS
To aid in this discussion, let’s ﬁrst take a closer look at the two
types of transistors used in small signal design.
1. Bipolar Transistor—A bipolar or bipolar junction
transistor (BJT) is a three-terminal semiconductor device
commonly used for ampliﬁcation of analog or digital
signals. It is constructed of doped sections of
semiconductor material sandwiched together. The center
section is called the base of the transistor. By varying the
current between the base and one terminal called the
FIG. 6-1.
The schematic symbols for PNP- and NPN-type BJTs, courtesy of
Wikipedia (www.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bipolar_junction_transistor).
emitter, one can vary the current ﬂow between the emitter
and a third terminal known as the collector, causing
ampliﬁcation of the signal at that terminal.
There are two major types of bipolar transistor: PNP and
NPN (Fig. 6-1). A PNP transistor has a layer of N-type
semiconductor between two layers of P-type material. An
NPN transistor has a layer of P-type material between
two layers of N-type material. In P-type material, electric
charges are carried mainly in the form of electron
deﬁciencies called holes. In N-type material, the charge
carriers are primarily electrons. Of the two types of BJTs,
the NPN is more commonly employed as it provides
better performance (e.g., allowing greater currents and
faster operation) in most circumstances.
As an example, consider Fig. 6-2. During typical
operation of the transistor, the emitter–base junction is
forward biased and the base–collector junction is reverse
biased. When a positive voltage is applied to the
base–emitter junction, the equilibrium between thermally
generated carriers and the repelling electric ﬁeld of the
depletion region becomes unbalanced, allowing
thermally excited electrons to inject into the base region.
These electrons wander (or diffuse) through the base from
the region of high concentration near the emitter towards
the region of low concentration near the collector.
The collector–base junction is reverse-biased, so little
electron injection occurs from the collector to the base.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
Emmiter
Base
Collector
n type
semiconductor
p type
semiconductor
n type
semiconductor
reverse
bias
foward
bias
FIG. 6-2.
NPN BJT with forward-biased E–B junction and reverse-biased
B–C junction, courtesy of Wikipedia (www.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bipolar_
junction_transistor).
Electrons that diffuse through the base towards the
collector are swept into the collector by the electric ﬁeld
in the depletion region of the collector–base junction.
The bipolar transistor has both advantages and
disadvantages relative to the ﬁeld-effect transistor.
Bipolar devices can switch signals at high speeds. And,
they can be manufactured to handle large currents in
order to serve as high-power ampliﬁers in audio
equipment and in wireless transmitters. On the other
hand, they are not as effective as FETs for weak-signal
ampliﬁcation, or for applications requiring high circuit
impedance.
Note that an improvement to the bipolar transistor is the
heterojunction bipolar transistor (HBT). It can handle
signals of very high frequencies up to several hundred
gigahertz and is therefore commonly used nowadays in
ultrafast circuits, mostly RF systems. One of the most
popular such devices is the silicon–germanium (SiGe)
HBT. Because it is compatible with standard silicon
digital processes it allows integration of very high speed
circuitry with complex lower speed digital circuitry.
2. Field-effect Transistor—The ﬁeld-effect transistor
or FET is a type of transistor commonly used for weak-
signal ampliﬁcation, such as for amplifying wireless
signals. Like the BJT, it can amplify analog or digital
signals. It can also switch DC or function as an oscillator.
The FET relies on an electric ﬁeld to control the shape
and therefore the conductivity of a path or channel in
a semiconductor material. During operation, current
ﬂows along a semiconductor path called the channel. At
one end of the channel, there is an electrode (source), and
at the other end is another electrode (drain). The
channel’s physical diameter is ﬁxed, but its effective
electrical diameter can be varied by the application of a
voltage to a control electrode known as the gate. This
gate permits electrons to ﬂow through or blocks their
passage by creating or eliminating a channel between the
source and drain. The conductivity of the FET depends,
Source
Oxide
Body
Gate
Drain
FIG. 6-3.
Cross-section of an N-type MOSFET, courtesy of Wikipedia
(www.wikipedia.org/wiki/Field_effect_transistor).
at any given instant in time, on the electrical diameter of
the channel. A small change in gate voltage can cause a
large variation in the current from the source to the drain.
This is how the FET ampliﬁes signals.
There are two major classes of FETs: junction FET
(JFET) and the metal-oxide- semiconductor FET
(MOSFET). All FETs (e.g., MOSFETs, MESFETs,
MODFETs, and IGBTs) except J-FETs have four
terminals (gate, drain, source and body/base/bulk). The
JFET has no body terminal.
The JFET uses a reverse biased P-N junction to separate
the gate from the body. Its channel consists of N-type
semiconductor (N-channel) or P-type semiconductor
(P-channel) material, while the gate is made of the
opposite semiconductor type. In P-type material, electric
charges are carried mainly in the form of electron
deﬁciencies called holes. In N-type material, the charge
carriers are primarily electrons. In a JFET, the junction is
the boundary between the channel and the gate.
Normally, this P-N junction is reverse-biased (a DC
voltage is applied to it) so that no current ﬂows between
the channel and the gate. However, under some
conditions there is a small current through the junction
during part of the input signal cycle.
The most commonly used FET today is the MOSFET; it
is used in everything from cellular handsets to wireless
base stations. The MOSFET has a channel which can be
either N-type or P-type semiconductor. Fig. 6-3 provides
an example of an N-type MOSFET. The gate electrode is
a piece of metal whose surface is oxidized. The thin
oxide layer (typically SiO2) electrically insulates the gate
from the channel or body. Because the oxide layer acts as
a dielectric, there is essentially never any current
between the gate and the channel during any part of the
signal cycle. As a result, the MOSFET has extremely
large input impedance.
As compared to the BJT, FETs are preferable for use in
circuits and systems requiring high impedance, as well as
for weak-signal work in wireless communications and
broadcast applications. In general, FETs are not used for
high-power ampliﬁcations, such as is required in large
wireless communications and broadcast transmitters.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Transistor Biasing
TRANSISTOR BIASING
In most RF ampliﬁer designs, unfortunately, very little thought is
ever given to the design of bias networks for the individual tran-
sistors involved. Often, the lack of interest in bias networks may
be justiﬁed. If, for instance, the ampliﬁer is to be operated only
at room temperature, there would be little need to spend much
time developing an extremely temperature-stable DC operating
point. If, on the other hand, the ampliﬁer must operate reliably
and maintain certain speciﬁcations (gain, noise ﬁgure, etc.) over
large temperature extremes, the DC bias network must be care-
fully considered. Consider, for example, the 2N5179 data sheet
from Freescale presented in the last chapter. A quick look at
the Y- and S-parameter curves for the device will reveal that a
change in the transistor’s bias point does in fact change all of
its RF operating characteristics. It only stands to reason, then,
that the DC operating point must remain stable under your spec-
iﬁed operating conditions or the RF characteristics may change
drastically.
It has been shown that there are two basic internal transistor
characteristics that have a profound effect upon the transistor’s
DC operating point over temperature; they are VBE and β.
The object of a good temperature-stable bias design (see Fig. 6-4)
is to minimize the effects of these parameters.
As the temperature increases, the base-to-emitter voltage (VBE)
of a transistor decreases at the rate of about 2.5 mV/◦C from
its nominal room-temperature value of 0.7V (for a silicon as
opposed to a CMOS or SiGe device). As VBE decreases, more
base current is allowed to ﬂow which, in turn, produces more
collector current and that is exactly what we would like to pre-
vent. The total change in VBE for a given temperature change
is called VBE. The primary external circuit factor that the cir-
cuit designer has control over, and which tends to minimize the
effects of VBE, is the emitter voltage (VE) of the transistor.
This is shown in Fig. 6-4. Here, a decrease in VBE with temper-
ature would cause an increase in emitter current and, hence, an
increase in VE. The increase in VE is a form of negative feedback
that tends to reverse bias the base-emitter junction and, there-
fore, decrease the collector current.A decrease in VBE, therefore,
tends to be counteracted by the increase in VE, and the collec-
tor current does not increase as much with temperature. If these
observations were put into equation form, we would have:
IC ≈−VBEIC
(Eq. 6-1)
where
IC = the change in collector current,
IC = the quiescent collector current,
VBE = the change in base-to-emitter voltage,
VE = the quiescent emitter voltage.
Thus, if VE were made equal to 20 times VBE, the collector
current would change only 5% over temperature due to VBE. It
is important to note that it is the value of the emitter voltage (VE)
and not the value of the emitter resistor (RE) that is the important
bias-design criteria.
IBBIB
IE ≈ IC
1. Choose the operating point for the transistor.
Ic = 10 mA, Vc = 10 V, Vcc = 20 V, β = 50
2. Assume a value for VE that considers bias stability:
VE = 2.5 volts
3. Assume IE ≈Ic for high-beta transistors.
4. Knowing IE and V E, calculate RE.
RE = VE
10 × 10−3
= 250 ohms
5. Knowing V cc, V c, and Ic, calculate Rc
Rc = Vcc −Vc
20 −10
10 × 10−3
= 1000 ohms
6. Knowing Ic and β, calculate IB.
IB = Ic
= 0.2 mA
7. Knowing V E and V BE, calculate V BB.
VBB = VE + VBE
= 2.5 + 0.7
= 3.2 volts
8. Assume a value for IBB, the larger the better (see text):
IBB = 15 mA
9. Knowing IBB and V BB, calculate R1.
R1 = VBB
1.5 × 10−3 ohms
= 2133 ohms
10. Knowing V CC, V BB, IBB, and IB, calculate R2.
R2 = VCC −VBB
IBB + IB
20 −3.2
1.7 × 10−3
= 9882 ohms
FIG. 6-4.
Bias network design 1.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
Equation 6-1 tends to imply that the higher VE is, the better.
This would be exactly true if we had nothing to worry about
except biasing the transistor for the speciﬁed operating point.
Obviously, there are other things that must be considered in the
design. A high emitter voltage, for instance, does tend to waste
power and decrease theACsignal gain.Abypass capacitor across
RE at the signal frequency is usually used to prevent the loss in
gain, but the wasted power may still be a problem.
If we assume that the ampliﬁer is to operate over a change in
temperature of no more than ±50◦C, then an emitter voltage of
2.5V will provide a ±5% variation in IC due to VBE. In fact,
you will ﬁnd that the majority of the transistor bias networks that
are similar to Fig. 6-4 will provide a value of VE from two to four
volts depending upon the values of VCC and VC chosen. Higher
values are, of course, possible depending upon the degree of
stability you need.
The change in a transistor’s DC current gain, or β, over temper-
ature, is also of importance to the circuit designer. Any variation
in β will produce a corresponding change in quiescent collector
current and will, therefore, disrupt the transistor’s designed oper-
ating point. The β of a silicon transistor typically increases with
temperature at the rate of about 0.5% per ◦C. Thus, for a ±50◦C
temperature variation you can expect the β of the transistor and,
hence, its collector current to vary as much as ±25%.
Not only does β vary with temperature, but the manufacturing
tolerance for β among transistors of the same part number is
typically very poor. It is not uncommon, for instance, for a man-
ufacturer to specify a 10 to 1 range for β on the data sheet (such
as 50 to 500). This, of course, makes it extremely difﬁcult to
design a bias network for the device in question when it is to
be used in a production environment. Thus, a stable operating
point with respect to β is difﬁcult to obtain from a production
standpoint as well as from a temperature standpoint.
The change in collector current for a corresponding change in β
can be approximated as:
IC = IC1
 β
β1β2
1 + RB
(Eq. 6-2)
where
IC1 = the collector current at β = β1,
β1 = the lowest value of β,
β2 = the highest value of β,
β = β2 −β1
RB = the parallel combination of R1 and R2 (in Fig. 6-4),
RE = the emitter resistor.
This equationindicatesthatonceatransistorisspeciﬁed, theonly
control that the designer has over the effect of β changes on col-
lector current is through the resistance ratio RB/RE. The smaller
this ratio, the less the collector current varies. Again, however,
some compromise is necessary.As you decrease the ratio RB/RE,
you also produce the undesirable effect of decreasing the cur-
rent gain of the ampliﬁer. Also, as the ratio approaches unity,
the improvement in operating-point stability rapidly decreases.
IBBIB
IC  IB  IBB
1. Choose the operating point for the transistor.
Ic = 10 mA, Vc = 10 V, Vcc = 20 V, β = 50
2. Assume values for V BB and IBB to supply a constant current, IB.
VBB = 2 volts
IBB = 1 mA
3. Knowing Ic and β, calculate IB.
IB = IC
= 0.2 mA
4. Knowing V BB, V BE = 0.7 V, and IB calculate RB.
RB = VBB −VBE
2 −0.7
0.2 × 10−3
= 6500 ohms
5. Knowing V BB and IBB, calculate R1.
R1 = VBB
1 × 10−3
= 2000 ohms
6. Knowing V BB, IBB, IB, and V C, calculate RF.
RF = VC −VBB
IBB + IB
10 −2
1.2 × 10−3
= 6667 ohms
7. Knowing V CC, V C, IC, IB and IBB, calculate RC.
RC =
VCC −VC
IC + IB + IBB
20 −10
11.2 × 10−3
= 893 ohms
FIG. 6-5.
Bias network design 2.
As a practical rule of thumb for stable designs, the ratio RB/RE
should be less than 10.
Figs. 6-4, 6-5, and 6-6 indicate three possible bias conﬁgura-
tions for bipolar transistors—in order of decreasing bias stabil-
ity. Complete step-by-step design instructions using a typical

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Transistor Biasing
IBIC
1. Choose the operating point for the transistor (V C, IC).
IC −10 mA, VC = 10 V, VCC = 20 V, β = 50
2. Knowing IC and β, calculate IB.
IB = IC
= 0.2 mA
3. Knowing V C, V B = V BE = 0.7 V, and IB, calculate RF.
RF = VC −VB
10 −0.7
200 × 10−6
= 46.5 K
4. Knowing IB, IC, V CC, and V C, calculate RC.
RC = VCC −VC
IB + IC
20 −10
10.2 × 10−3
= 980 ohms
FIG. 6-6.
Bias network design 3.
example are included with each circuit-conﬁguration sketch.
Note that the bias networks of Figs. 6-5 and 6-6 do not contain
the emitter resistor (RE) which provides the negative feedback
needed to counteract collector-current variations over tempera-
ture. Instead, resistor RF is connected from the collector to the
base of the transistor to provide the negative feedback. Obvi-
ously, for these two designs, the designer has control over
neither the ratio RB/RE nor the voltage VE of Fig. 6-4. The
designs are, therefore, of the “potluck” variety as far as DC
stability is concerned. You basically take what you get. Surpris-
ingly, however, RF works quite well in minimizing the effects of
transistor-parameter variations over temperature.
Figs. 6-7 and 6-8 show similar bias arrangements and design
procedures for a ﬁeld-effect transistor (FET). These are based
on the well-known formula:
ID = IDSS
1 −VGS
(Eq. 6-3)
where
ID = the drain current,
IDSS = the drain current with VGS = 0,
VGS = the gate-to-source voltage,
Vp = the pinch-off voltage.
IG  0
1. Choose the operating point for the transistor.
ID = 10 mA, VD = 10 V,VCC = 20 V
2. Knowing V CC, V D, and ID, calculate Rd.
Rd = VCC −VD
10 V
10 mA
= 1000 ohms
3. Determine V P and IDSS from the data sheet.
VP = −6 volts
IDSS = 5 mA
4. Knowing ID, IDSS, and V P, calculate V GS.
VGS = VP
⎝1 −
IDSS
= −6
⎝1 −
10 × 10−3
5 × 10−3
= 2.48 volts
5. Assume a value for V S in the 2- to 3-volt range.
VS = 2.5 volts
6. Knowing V S and ID, calculate RS.
RS = VS
10 × 10−3
= 250 ohms
7. Knowing V S and V GS, calculate V G.
VG = VGS + VS
= 2.48 + 2.5
= 4.98 volts
8. Assume a value for R1 based upon dc input resistance needs.
R1 = 220 K
9. Knowing R1, V G, and V CC, calculate R2.
R2 = R1(VCC −VG)
= 220 × 103(20 −4.98)
4.98
= 664 K
FIG. 6-7.
Bias network design 4.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
IG  0
1. Choose an operating point for the transistor.
ID = 10 mA, VD = 10 V, VCC = 20 V
2. Knowing V CC, V D, and ID, calculate RD.
RD = VCC
20 −10
10 × 10−3
= 1000 ohms
3. Determine V P and IDSS from the transistor data sheet.
VP = −6 volts
IDSS = 5 mA
4. Knowing ID, IDSS, and V P, calculate V GS.
VGS = VP
⎝1 −
IDSS
= −6
⎝1 −
10 × 10−3
5 × 10−3
= 2.48 volts
5. Knowing IG = 0, V GS = VS, and ID, calculate RS.
RS = VS
= VGS
2.48
10 × 10−3
= 248 ohms
6. Sine IG = 0, RG can be chosen to be any large value of
resistor–approximately 1 megohm.
FIG. 6-8.
Bias network design 5.
ID is usually a value chosen by the user as part of the bias speci-
ﬁcations, and IDSS and Vp can be found on the data sheet for the
transistor. Once these three values are known, Equation 6-3 can
be used to solve for VGS, and a suitable bias circuit can then be
found.
DESIGN USING Y PARAMETERS
The RF small-signal performance of a transistor can be com-
pletely characterized by its two-port admittance parameters.
Based on these parameters, equations can be written to aid you
both in ﬁnding a transistor to suit your needs and in completing
the design once the transistor is selected.
One of the ﬁrst requirements in any ampliﬁer design is to choose
the transistor that is best suited for the job. Many RF ampliﬁer
designsaredoomedfromthebeginningsimplybecausetheactive
device chosen for the job should have never been considered.
Spend a little time shopping for the right device for your appli-
cation. The more time you spend shopping prior to the start of
the actual design, the less hair-pulling there will be later. Two of
the most important considerations, in choosing a transistor for
use in any ampliﬁer design, are its stability and its maximum
available gain (MAG). Stability, as it is used here, is a measure
of the transistor’s tendency toward oscillation. MAG is a type of
ﬁgure-of-merit for the transistor, which indicates the maximum
theoretical power gain you can expect to obtain from the device
when it is conjugately matched to its source and load impedance.
The MAG is never actually reached in practice; nevertheless, it
is quite useful in gauging the capabilities of a transistor.
Stability Calculations
It has been said that one of the easiest methods of building an
oscillator is to design an ampliﬁer. Although experience has
found this to be true, it really need not be the case. A bit of
prior planning and basic a priori knowledge about the transistor
thatis tobeusedcan go alongwaytoward preventingoscillations
in any ampliﬁer design.
It is possible to predict the degree of stability (or lack thereof) of
a transistor before you actually place the device in a circuit. This
is done through a calculation of the Linvill stability factor, C.
|yryf |
2gigo −Re(yryf )
(Eq. 6-4)
where
| = the magnitude of the product in brackets,
yr = the reverse-transfer admittance,
yf = the forward-transfer admittance,
gi = the input conductance,
go = the output conductance,
Re = the real part of the product in parentheses.
When C is less than 1, the transistor is unconditionally stable at
the bias point you have chosen. This means that you could choose
any possible combination of source and load impedance for the
device, and the ampliﬁer would remain stable providing that no
external feedback paths exist which have not been accounted for.
If C is greater than 1, the transistor is potentially unstable and
will oscillate for certain values of source and load impedance.
A C-factor greater than 1 does not indicate, however, that the
transistor cannot be used as an ampliﬁer. It merely indicates that
you must exercise extreme care in choosing your source and load
impedances or oscillations may occur.
The Linvill stability factor is useful in predicting a potential sta-
bility problem. It does not indicate the actual impedance values

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Design Using Y Parameters
between which the transistor will go unstable. Obviously, if a
transistor is chosen for a particular design problem, and the tran-
sistor’s C-factor is less than 1 (unconditionally stable), it will be
much easier to work with than a transistor which is potentially
unstable. Keep in mind also that if C is less than but very close
to 1 for any transistor, then any change in the bias point due
to temperature variation could cause the transistor to become
potentially unstable and most likely oscillate at some frequency.
This is because Y parameters are speciﬁed at a particular bias
point which varies with temperature. This is a very important
concept to remember. The smaller C is, the better.
Y parameters can also be used to predict the stability of an ampli-
ﬁer given certain values of load and source impedance. This is
called the Stern stability factor and is given by
K = 2(gi + GS)(go + GL)
|yryf | + Re(yryf )
(Eq. 6-5)
where
GS = the source conductance,
GL = the load conductance.
In this case, if K is greater than 1, the circuit will be stable for that
value of source and load impedance. If K is less than 1, the circuit
is potentially unstable and will most likely oscillate at some
frequency. Note that the K-factor is a more deﬁnitive calculation
for stability in that it predicts stability for a particular circuit.
The C-factor, on the other hand, predicts a kind of nebulous
possibility for instability without giving you an indication as to
where the instability may occur.
The Linvill stability factor is, therefore, useful in ﬁnding sta-
ble transistors while the Stern stability factor predicts possible
stability problems with circuits.
Maximum Available Gain
The MAG of a transistor can be found by using the following
equation:
MAG = |yf |2
4gigo
(Eq. 6-6)
MAG is a useful calculation in the initial search for a transistor
for any particular application. It will give you a good indication
as to whether or not the transistor can provide enough gain for
the task.
The maximum available gain for a transistor occurs when yr = 0,
and when YL and YS are the complex conjugates of yo and yi,
respectively. The condition that yr must equal zero for maximum
gain to occur is due to the fact that under normal conditions, yr
acts as a negative feedback path internal to the transistor. With
yr = 0, no feedback is allowed and the gain is at a maximum.
In practical situations, it is physically impossible to reduce yr
to zero and, as a result, MAG can never truly be attained. It is
possible, however, to very nearly achieve the MAG calculated
in Equation 6-6 through a simultaneous conjugate match of the
input and output admittance of the transistor. Thus, Equation 6-
6 remains a valid tool in the search for a suitable transistor as
long as you understand its limitations. For example, if an ampli-
ﬁer design calls for a minimum power gain of 18 dB at 200 MHz,
don’t choose a transistor with a calculated MAG of 19 dB.Allow
yourself a small margin to cover for realistic values of yr, com-
ponent losses in the matching network, and variation in the bias
point over temperature.
Simultaneous Conjugate Matching (Unconditionally
Stable Transistors)
Optimum power gain is obtained from a transistor when yi and
yo are conjugately matched to YS and YL, respectively. As was
discussed in Chapter 5, however, the reverse-transfer admit-
tance (yr) associated with each transistor tends to reﬂect any
impedance changes made at one port back toward the other port,
causing a change in that port’s impedance characteristics. This
makes it very difﬁcult to design good matching networks for
a transistor while using only its input and output admittances
and totally ignoring the contribution that yr makes to the transis-
tor’s impedance characteristics. Even though YL affects the input
admittance of the transistor and YS affects its output admittance,
it is still possible to provide the transistor with a simultaneous
conjugate match for maximum power transfer (from source to
load) by using the following design equations:
GS =
[2gigo −Re(yf yr)]2 −|yf yr|2
(Eq. 6-7)
BS = −jbi + Im(yf yr)
(Eq. 6-8)
GL =
[2gigo −Re(yf yr)]2 −|yf yr|2
(Eq. 6-9)
= GSgo
(Eq. 6-10)
BL = −jbo + Im(yf yr)
(Eq. 6-11)
where
GS = the source conductance,
BS = the source susceptance,
GL = the load conductance,
BL = the load susceptance,
Im = the imaginary part of the product in parentheses.
The above equations may look formidable but actually they
are not—once you have used them a few times. Let’s try an
example of a simultaneous conjugate match for clariﬁcation
(Example 6-1).
Note that a simultaneous conjugate match may also be
performed using a number of easily available and conve-
nient software design tools. As an example, consider the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
following demo which utilizes The MathWorks’ RF Toolbox
(www.mathworks.com/products/rftoolbox), a specialized MAT-
LAB toolbox for designing and analyzing networks of RF
components. In particular, this example uses the Smith Chart
plot to ﬁnd the input and output matching networks that maxi-
mize the power delivered to a 50-ohm load. First the demo ﬁnds
the required transmission line lengths for the single-stub match-
ing networks. Then it cascades the matching networks with the
ampliﬁer and visualizes the results.
EXAMPLE 6-1
A transistor has the following Y parameters at 100 MHz, with
V CE = 10 volts and IC = 5 mA.
yi = 8 + j5.7 mmhos
yo = 0.4 + j1.5 mmhos
yf = 52 −j20 mmhos
yr = 0.01 −j0.1 mmho
Design an ampliﬁer which will provide maximum power gain
between a 50-ohm source and a 50-ohm load at 100 MHz.
Solution
First, calculate the Linvill stability factor using Equation 6-4.
|yfyr|
2gigo −Re(yfyr)
|(52 −j20)(0.01 −j0.1)|
2(8)(0.4) −Re[(52 −j20)(0.01 −j0.1)]
5.57
6.4 −(−1.47)
= 0.71
Since C is less than 1, the device is unconditionally stable and
we may proceed with the design. Had C been greater than 1,
however, we would have had to be extremely careful in
matching the transistor to the source and load as instability
could occur.
The MAG of this transistor is computed with Equation 6-6:
MAG = |yf|2
4gigo
= |52 −j20|2
4(8)(0.4)
= 242.5
= 23.8 dB
The actual gain we can achieve will be somewhat less than
this due to yr and component losses.
Using Equations 6-7 through 6-11, calculate the source and
load admittances for a simultaneous conjugate match. For the
source, using Equation 6-7:
GS =
[2gigo −Re(yfyr)]2 −|yfyr|2
[6.4 + 1.47]2 −(5.57)2
2(.4)
= 6.95 mmhos
And, with Equation 6-8:
BS = −jbi + Im(yfyr)
= −j5.7 + j−5.37
2(.4)
= −j12.41 mmhos
Therefore, the source admittance that the transistor must
“see” for optimum power transfer is 6.95 −j12.41 mmhos.
The transistor’s actual input admittance is the conjugate of
this number, or 6.95 + j12.41 mmhos. For the load, using
Equation 6-10:
GL = GSgo
= (6.95) (0.4)
= 0.347 mmho
And, with Equation 6-11:
BL = −jbo + Im(yfyr)
= −j1.5 + j−5.37
2(8)
= −j1.84 mmhos
Thus, for optimum power transfer, the load admittance must
be 0.347 −j1.84 mmhos. The actual output admittance of the
transistor is the conjugate of the load admittance, or
0.347 + j1.84 mmhos.
Continued on next page
Step 1. Create an RFCKT.AMPLIFIER Object with the data in
the samplebjt2.s2p data ﬁle
close all;
clear all;
amp = rfckt.amplifier;
read(amp, 'samplebjt2.s2p');

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Design Using Y Parameters
EXAMPLE 6-1—Cont
FIG. 6-9.
Input network design for Example 6-1. For a more detailed full color view of this ﬁgure, please visit our companion site at
http://books.elsevier.com/companions/9780750685184.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
EXAMPLE 6-1—Cont
FIG. 6-10.
Output network design for Example 6-1. For a more detailed full color view of this ﬁgure, please visit our companion site at
http://books.elsevier.com/companions/9780750685184.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Design Using Y Parameters
EXAMPLE 6-1—Cont
The next step is to design the input and output
impedance-matching networks that will transform the
50-ohm source and load to the impedance which the
transistor would like to see for optimum power transfer.
The input matching design is shown on the Smith Chart of
Fig. 6-9. This chart is normalized so that the center of the
chart represents 50 ohms or 20 mmhos. Thus, the point
YS = 6.95 −j12.42 mmhos is normalized to:
YS = 50(6.95 −j12.41) mmhos
= 0.34 −j0.62 mho
This normalized admittance is shown plotted in Fig. 6-9.
Note that its corresponding impedance can be read directly
from the chart as ZS = 0.69 + j1.2 ohms. The input matching
network must transform the 50-ohm source impedance to the
impedance represented by this point. As was discussed in
Chapter 4, there are numerous impedance-matching
networks available to do the trick. The two-element L network
was chosen here for simplicity and convenience.
Arc AB = series C = −j1.3 ohms
Arc BC = shunt L = −j1.1 mhos
The output circuit is designed and plotted in Fig. 6-10. Because
the admittance values needed in the output network are so
small, this chart had to be normalized to 200 ohms (5 mmhos).
Thus, the normalized admittance plotted on the chart is:
YL = 200(0.347 −j1.84) mmhos
= 0.069 −j0.368 mho
ZL = 0.495 + j2.62 ohms
The normalized 50-ohm load must be transformed to this
impedance for maximum transfer of power. Again, the
two-element L network was chosen to perform the match.
Arc AB = series C = −j1.9 ohms
Arc BC = shunt L = −j0.89 mho
The input and output matching networks are shown in
Fig. 6-11. For clarity, the bias circuitry is not shown.
Actual component values are found using Equations 4-11
through 4-14. For the input network:
C1 =
2π(100 × 106)(1.3)(50)
= 24.5 pF
Fig. 6-11.
Circuit topology for Example 6-1.
L1 = N
2π(100 × 106)(1.1)
= 72 nH
Similarly, for the output network:
C2 =
2π(100 × 106)(1.9)(200)
= 4.18 pF
L2 =
2π(100 × 106)(0.89)
= 358 nH
The ﬁnal circuit, including the bias network, might appear as
shown in Fig. 6-12. The 0.1-μF capacitors provide RF bypass at
100 MHz.
10 K
20 V
72 nH
358 nH
0.1mF
4.2 pF
24.5pF
50 
50 
500 
0.1F
0.1mF
FIG. 6-12.
Final circuit for Example 6-1.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
Analyze the ampliﬁer at the desired center frequency of 1.9 GHz
and acquire the ampliﬁer S-parameters, using the ANALYZE
and CALCULATE methods of circuit object.
analyze(amp, 1.9e9);
data = calculate(amp, 'S11', 'S12',
'S21', 'S22', 'none');
[s11, s12, s21, s22] = deal(data{1},
data{2}, data{3}, data&#
123;4);
Step 2. Check for ampliﬁer stability
Before proceeding with the design, check the stability of the
ampliﬁer. For unconditional stability, K must be greater than 1
and the absolute value of delta must be less than 1.
delta = s11*s22-s12*s21;
K = (1-abs(s11)ˆ2-
abs(s22)ˆ2+abs(delta)ˆ2)/(2*abs(s12*s21))
abs_delta = abs(delta)
K = 1.0599
abs_delta = 0.6776
Since both conditions are satisﬁed, the ampliﬁer is uncondition-
ally stable. Therefore, any passive source or load produces a
stable condition.
Step 3. Deﬁne the simultaneous conjugate
match value
To design the input and output matching networks, the demo
calculates the required source and load reﬂection coefﬁcients
for a simultaneous conjugate match. It calculates the necessary
load reﬂection coefﬁcient for the design of the output matching
network using the ampliﬁer S-parameters.
B = 1+abs(s22)ˆ2-abs(s11)ˆ2-abs(delta)ˆ2;
C = s22-delta*conj(s11);
gammaL = (B-sqrt(Bˆ2-4*abs(C)ˆ2))/2/C;
Step 4. Draw the SWR circle
Deﬁne the standing wave ratio (SWR) circle associated with
the load reﬂection coefﬁcient. The radius of this circle is given
by the magnitude of the load reﬂection coefﬁcient. The demo
uses this radius (center is the origin) to calculate points on the
circle.
theta = 0:pi/50:2*pi;
xin = abs(gammaL)*cos(theta);
yin = abs(gammaL)*sin(theta);
j1.0
j0.5
j0.2
j0.2
j0.5
j1.0
j2.0
j5.0
j5.0
j2.0
FIG. 6-13.
YZ Smith Chart plot of desired input impedance at the
output matching network.
Then it plots and labels the desired input impedance at the output
matching network (based on the load reﬂection coefﬁcient) along
with the SWR circle on a YZ Smith Chart (Fig. 6-13).
hs = smithchart;
set(hs, 'Type', 'yz');
hold on
plot(xin, yin, '-', real(gammaL),
imag(gammaL), 'k.', ...
'LineWidth', 2, 'MarkerSize', 20);
text(-0.05, 0.35, 'z_{in}', 'FontSize',
12, 'FontUnits', 'normalized');
Step 5. Draw the constant conductance circle
To ﬁnd the required susceptance to move the 50-ohm load
admittance to the SWR circle, the demo deﬁnes the constant con-
ductance circle. To do this, the demo calculates the normalized
load impedance and the corresponding 50-ohm load admittance
for the transmission lines.
zL = 50/50; % zL = 1
yL = 1/zL; % yL = 1
The demo calculates the diameter and center of the circle using
the conductance value.
g = real(yL); % g = 1
d = -(g-1)/(g+1)+1; % d = 1
C = -1+d/2; % C = -1/2
Then it uses the radius and center of the constant conductance
circle to calculate points on the circle.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Design Using Y Parameters
xg = d/2*cos(theta)+C;
yg = d/2*sin(theta);
Next, the demo plots and labels the load impedance point
(located at the center of the Smith Chart) along with the con-
stant conductance circle associated with the load admittance on
the Smith Chart (Fig. 6-14).
plot(xg, yg, 'r', 0, 0, 'k.',
'LineWidth', 2, 'MarkerSize', 20);
text(0.05, 0, 'z_L', 'FontSize', 12,
'FontUnits', 'normalized');
j1.0
j0.5
j0.2
j0.2
j0.5
j1.0
j2.0
j5.0
j2.0
j2.0
FIG. 6-14.
Smith Chart with load impedance point and constant
conductance circle.
Step 6. Find the intersection points
NowthatthedemohasdrawntheSWRandconstantconductance
circles, you can ﬁnd the points of intersection corresponding to
the two possible solutions and the required susceptance values
for the stub by visual inspection. Since only one solution is
necessary, choose the lower-half intersection point, as shown
in Fig. 6-15.
yA = 1+0.62j;
The demo plots and labels this intersection point on the Smith
Chart using the reﬂection coefﬁcient calculated from the admit-
tance value.
gammaA = (1/yA-1)/(1/yA+1);
plot(real(gammaA), imag(gammaA), 'k.',
'MarkerSize', 20);
text(-0.09, -0.35, 'A', 'FontSize', 12,
'FontUnits', 'normalized');
hold off
j1.0
j0.5
j0.2
j0.2
j0.5
j1.0
j2.0
j5.0
j5.0
j2.0
FIG. 6-15.
Intersection point marked on Smith Chart.
Step 7. Calculate the required transmission line lengths
This demo ﬁnds the required lengths of the series transmission
line and open-circuit stub (based on the intersection point) by
calculating the required susceptance value for the stub and its
corresponding reﬂection coefﬁcient.
jbSA = yA-yL;
gammaSA = (1/jbSA-1)/(1/jbSA+1);
Then it ﬁnds the length of the stub by calculating the angle
of rotation from the y = 0 (open-circuit) point to the calculated
susceptance point.
stubAng = -angle(gammaSA)*180/pi;
stubLengthA = stubAng/360/2
stubLengthA = 0.0883
Finally, ﬁnd the required length of the series transmission line
based on the angle of rotation from point A to Zin.
seriesAng = 360-(angle(gammaL)-angle
(gammaA))*180/pi;
seriesLengthA = seriesAng/360/2
seriesLengthA = 0.2147
The required lengths (in terms of wavelength) for the transmis-
sion lines based on the solution from point A are given above.
Following a similar approach, the line lengths for the input
matching network are:
stubLengthin = 0.0763;
seriesLengthin = 0.2266;

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
Step 8. Verify the design
Build the circuit using microstrip transmission lines with a char-
acteristic impedance of 50 ohms for the matching networks.
To accomplish this, analyze a microstrip object, with default
properties, at the design frequency of 1.9 GHz.
hstubOutput = rfckt.microstrip;
analyze(hstubOutput, 1.9e9);
Z0 = get(hstubOutput, 'Z0')
Z0 = 50.2561
This characteristic impedance is close to the desired impedance
(50 ohms), and the demo can use it for this design. To appro-
priately set the required transmission line lengths in meters, the
demo analyzes the microstrip to get a phase velocity value, which
is necessary to calculate the wavelength.
phase_vel = get(hstubOutput, 'PV');
Set the appropriate transmission line lengths for the two series
microstrip transmission lines necessary for the input and output
matching networks.
hseriesOutput = rfckt.microstrip( ...
'LineLength', phase_vel/1.9e9*series
LengthA);
hseriesInput = rfckt.microstrip( ...
'LineLength', phase_vel/1.9e9*series
Lengthin);
Similarly, set the transmission line lengths and the stub mode
for the two stubs necessary for the input and output matching
networks.
set(hstubOutput, 'LineLength',
phase_vel/1.9e9*stubLengthA, ...
'StubMode', 'shunt', 'Termination',
'open');
hstubInput = rfckt.microstrip( ...
'LineLength', phase_vel/1.9e9*stub
Lengthin, ...
'StubMode', 'shunt', 'Termination',
'open');
Then cascade the circuit elements and analyze the ampliﬁer with
and without the matching networks over the frequency range of
1.5 to 2.3 GHz to visualize and compare the results.
matched_amp = rfckt.cascade('Ckts', ...
{hstubInput, hseriesInput, amp,
hseriesOutput, hstubOutput});
analyze(matched_amp, 1.5e9:1e8:2.3e9);
analyze(amp, 1.5e9:1e8:2.3e9);
To verify the simultaneous conjugate match at the input and
output of the ampliﬁer, plot S11 and S22 parameters in dB for
both circuits (see Figs. 6-16 and 6-17).
S11 - Original Amplifier
S11 - Matched Amplifier
Magnitude (decibles)
Freq (GHz)
FIG. 6-16.
Plot of S11 in dB.
S22 - Original Amplifier
S22 - Matched Amplifier
Magnitude (decibles)
Freq (GHz)
FIG. 6-17.
Plot of S22 in dB.
hls = zeros(1,2);
hls(1) = plot(amp, 'S11', 'dB');
hold on;
hls(2) = plot(matched_amp, 'S11', 'dB');
set(hls(2), 'Color', [1 0 0]);
legend(hls,'S_{11} - Original Amplifier',
'S_{11} - Matched Ampli
fier');
hold off

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Design Using Y Parameters
hls(1) = plot(amp, 'S22', 'dB');
hold on;
hls(2) = plot(matched_amp, 'S22', 'dB');
set(hls(2), 'Color', [1 0 0]);
legend(hls,'S_{22} - Original Amplifier',
'S_{22} - Matched Ampli
fier');
hold off
Finally, plot S21 in dB for both circuits (Fig. 6-18).
hls(1) = plot(amp, 'S21', 'dB');
hold on;
hls(2) = plot(matched_amp, 'S21', 'dB');
set(hls(2), 'Color', [1 0 0]);
legend(hls,'S_{21} - Original Amplifier',
'S_{21} - Matched Ampli
fier');
hold off
S22 - Original Amplifier
S22 - Matched Amplifier
Magnitude (decibles)
18.5
19.5
20.5
17.5
16.5
Freq (GHz)
FIG. 6-18.
Plot of S21 in dB.
You can compare the matched ampliﬁer results with the expected
transducer gain (in dB). From the S21 plot, you can see that the
gain of the matched ampliﬁer at 1.9 GHz is between 19 dB and
19.5 dB. The expected gain is:
Gt = 10*log10(abs(s21)/abs(s12)*
(K-sqrt(Kˆ2-1)))
Gt = 19.2407
So, the matched ampliﬁer’s gain is very close to the expected
transducer gain.
Transducer gain
Transducer gain is deﬁned as the output power that is delivered
to a load by a source, divided by the maximum power available
from the source. This is the gain term most often referenced in RF
ampliﬁer design work. Transducer gain includes the effects of
input and output impedance matching as well as the contribution
that the transistor makes to the overall gain of the ampliﬁer stage.
Component resistive losses are neglected.
Given the source admittance (YS) and load admittance (YL) as
seen by the transistor, the transducer gain is given by:
GT =
4GSGL|yf |2
|(yi + YS)(yo + YL) −yf yr|2
(Eq. 6-12)
EXAMPLE 6-2
Find the gain of the circuit that was designed in Example
6-1. Disregard any component losses.
Solution
The transducer gain for the ampliﬁer is determined by
substituting the values given in Example 6-1 into the
Equation 6-12:
GT =
4(6.95)(0.347)|52 −j20|2
|(8 + j5.7 + 6.95 −j12.41)(0.4 + j1.5 + 0.347
−j1.84) −(52 −j20)(0.01 −j0.1)|2
29943
|8.88 −j10.1 + 1.47 + j5.37|2
= 231.2
= 23.64 dB
The transducer gain calculated in Example 6-2 is very close to the
MAG that was calculated in Example 6-1. Therefore, in this case,
the reverse-transfer admittance (yr) of the transistor has very
little effect on the overall gain of the stage. In many instances,
however, yr can take an appreciable toll on gain. For this reason,
it is best to calculate GT once the transistor’s load and source
admittances are determined. The calculation will provide you
with a very good estimate of what the actual gain of the ampliﬁer
will be.
Designing with Potentially Unstable Transistors
If the Linvill stability factor (C) calculated with Equation 6-4
is greater than 1, the transistor you have chosen is potentially

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
unstable and may oscillate under certain conditions of source
and load impedance. If this is the case, there are several options
available that will enable you to use the transistor in a stable
ampliﬁer conﬁguration:
1. Select a new bias point for the transistor.
2. Unilateralize or neutralize the transistor.
3. Selectively mismatch the input and output impedance of
the transistor to reduce the gain of the stage.
The simplest solution to a stability problem is very often
Option1. Thisisespeciallytrueif C calculatestobeverycloseto,
but greater than, 1. Remember, any change in a transistor’s oper-
ating point has a direct effect on its RF characteristics. Therefore,
by simply changing the DC bias point, it is possible to change
the Y parameters of the transistor and, hence, its stability. Of
course, if this approach is taken, it is absolutely critical that the
bias point be temperature-stable over the range of temperatures
that the device must operate.
Since instability is generally caused by the feedback path,
which consists of the reverse-transfer admittance (yr) of the
transistor, unilateralization or neutralization will often stabilize
a design. Unilateralization consists of providing an external
feedback path (Yf ) from the output to the input, such that
Yf = −yr. Thus, Yf cancels yr leaving a composite reverse-
transfer admittance (yrc) equal to zero. With yrc equal to zero,
the device is unconditionally stable. This can be veriﬁed by
substituting yrc = 0 for yr in Equation 6-4. The Linvill stability
factor in this case becomes zero, thus indicating unconditional
stability.
Often, when yr is a complex admittance consisting of gr ± jbr,
it becomes very difﬁcult to provide the correct external reverse
admittance needed to totally eliminate the effect of yr. In such
cases, neutralization is often used. Neutralization is similar to
unilateralization except that only the imaginary component of yr
is counteracted. An external feedback path is constructed from
output to input such that Bf = −br. Thus, the composite reverse-
transfer susceptance (brc) is equal to zero. Neutralization also
tends to tame wild ampliﬁers because, in most transistors, gr
is negligible when compared to br. Thus, the elimination of br
very nearly eliminates yr. For this reason, neutralization is gen-
erally preferred over unilateralization. Two types of neutralizing
circuits are shown in Fig. 6-19. In Fig. 6-19A, the series induc-
tor and capacitor can be tuned to provide the correct amount of
negative susceptance (inductance) necessary to cancel a positive
reverse-transfer susceptance internal to the transistor. The cir-
cuit of Fig. 6-19B can be used to provide the correct amount of
external positive susceptance necessary to cancel any −jb that
is internal to the transistor.
The addition of external components in order to neutralize an
ampliﬁer tends to increase the cost and complexity of the circuit.
(A) For yr  jb
(B) For yr  jb
FIG. 6-19.
Neutralization circuits.
Also, most neutralization circuits tend to neutralize the ampliﬁer
at the operating frequency only, and may cause problems (insta-
bility) at other frequencies. It is possible, however, to stabilize an
ampliﬁer without any form of external feedback. Another look
at the Stern stability factor (K) in Equation 6-5 will reveal how.
If GS and GL are made sufﬁciently large enough to force K to be
greater than 1, then the ampliﬁer will remain stable for those
terminations. This suggests selectively mismatching the transis-
tor to achieve stability. Thus, the gain of the ampliﬁer must be
less than that which would be possible with a simultaneous con-
jugate match. The procedure for a design using unstable devices
is as follows:
1. Choose GS based on the optimum noise-ﬁgure
information in the transistor’s data sheet. Alternately,
choose GS based on some other criteria, such as
convenience or input-network Q.
2. Select a value of K that will assure you of a stable
ampliﬁer (K > 1).
3. Substitute the above values for K and GS into
Equation 6-5 and solve for GL.
4. Now that GS and GL are known, all that remains is to ﬁnd
BS and BL. Choose a value of BL equal to the −bo of the
transistor. The corresponding YL which results will then
be very close to the true YL that is theoretically needed to
complete the design.
5. Next, calculate the transistor’s input admittance (Yin)
using the load chosen in Step 4 and the formula in
Equation 6-13.
Yin = yi −
yryf
yo + YL
(Eq. 6-13)
where
YL = GL ± jBL (found in Steps 3 and 4).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Design Using S Parameters
6. Once Yin is known, set BS equal to the negative of the
imaginary part of Yin, or:
BS = −Bin
7. Calculate the gain of the stage using Equation 6-12.
From this point forward, it is only necessary to provide input
and output networks that will present the calculated YS and YL
to the transistor. Example 6-3 illustrates the procedure.
EXAMPLE 6-3
Consider a transistor with the following Y parameters at
200 MHz:
yi = 2.25 + j7.2
yo = 0.4 + j1.9
yf = 40 −j20
yr = 0.05 −j0.7
All of the above parameters are in mmhos. Find source and
load admittances that will assure you of a stable design. Find
the gain of the ampliﬁer.
Solution
The Linvill stability factor (C) for the transistor is equal
to 2.27 as calculated using Equation 6-4. Therefore, the
device is potentially unstable and you must exercise extreme
caution in choosing a source and load admittance for the
transistor. Proceed as previously outlined in Steps 1
through 7.
The data sheet for the 2N5179 transistor states that the
optimum source resistance for the best noise ﬁgure is
250 ohms. Thus, GS = 1/RS = 4 mmhos. Choose a Stern
stability factor of K = 3 for an adequate safety
margin.
Substitute GS and K into Equation 6-5 and solve for GL.
K = 2(gi + GS)(go + GL)
|yryf| + Re(yryf)
3 = 2(2.25 + 4)(0.4 + GL)
31.35 + (−12)
GL = 4.24 mmhos
Set BL equal to −bo of the transistor,
BL = −j1.9 mmhos
The load admittance is now deﬁned.
YL = 4.24 −j1.9 mmhos
Calculate the input admittance of the transistor using
Equation 6-13 and YL.
Yin = yi −
yryf
yo + YL
= 2.25 + j7.2 −(0.701 ∠−85.9◦)(44.72∠−26.6◦)
0.4 + j1.9 + 4.24 −j1.9
= 4.84 + j13.44 mmhos
Set BS equal to the negative of the imaginary part of Yin.
BS = j13.44 mmhos
The source admittance needed for the design is now
deﬁned as:
YS = 4.84 −j13.44 mmhos
Now that YS and YL are known, you can calculate the
expected gain of the ampliﬁer using Equation 6-12.
GT =
4(4.84)(4.24)|(44.72)|2
|(7.08 −j6.24)(4.64) −(−12 −j28.96)|2
= 135,671.7
2011
= 67.61
= 18.3 dB
Therefore, even though the transistor is not conjugately
matched, you can still realize a respectable amount of gain
while maintaining a perfectly stable ampliﬁer. Component
values can be found by following the procedures outlined in
Example 6-1.
DESIGN USING S PARAMETERS
As we discussed in Chapter 5, transistors can also be com-
pletely characterized by their scattering or S parameters. With
these parameters, it is possible to calculate potential instabilities
(tendency toward oscillation), maximum available gain, input
and output impedances, and transducer gain. It is also possi-
ble to calculate optimum source and load impedances either
for simultaneous conjugate matching or simply to help you
choose speciﬁc source and load impedances for a speciﬁed
transducer gain.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
Like Y parameters, S parameters vary with frequency and bias
level. Therefore, you must ﬁrst choose a transistor, select
a stable operating point, and determine its S parameters at
that operating point (either by measurement or from a data
sheet) before following the procedures given in the following
sections.
Stability
The tendency of a transistor toward oscillation can be gauged by
its S-parameter data in much the same manner as was done in an
earlier section with Y parameters. The calculation can be made
even before an ampliﬁer is built and, thus, it serves as a useful
tool in ﬁnding a suitable transistor for your application.
To calculate the stability of a transistor with S parameters, you
must ﬁrst calculate the intermediate quantity DS:
DS = S11S22 −S12S21
(Eq. 6-14)
The Rollett Stability Factor (K) is then calculated as:
K = 1 + |Ds|2 −|S11|2 −|S22|2
2 · |S21| · |S12|
(Eq. 6-15)
If K is greater than 1, then the device will be unconditionally sta-
ble for any combination of source and load impedance. If, on the
other hand, K calculatestobe lessthan 1, thedeviceis potentially
unstable and will most likely oscillate with certain combinations
of source and load impedance. With K less than 1, you must be
extremely careful in choosing source and load impedances for
the transistor. It does not mean that the transistor cannot be used
for your application; it merely indicates that the transistor will
be more difﬁcult to use.
If K calculates to be less than 1, there are several approaches
that you can take to complete the design:
1. Select another bias point for the transistor.
2. Choose a different transistor.
3. Follow the procedures outlined later in this chapter.
Maximum Available Gain
Themaximumgainyoucouldeverhopetoachievefromatransis-
tor under conjugately matched conditions is called the Maximum
Available Gain (MAG). To calculate MAG, ﬁrst calculate the
intermediate quantity B1:
B1 = 1 + |S11|2 −|S22|2 −|DS|2
(Eq. 6-16)
where DS is the quantity calculated using Equation 6-14.
The MAG is then calculated:
MAG = 10 log |S21|
|S12| + 10 log |K ±
K2 −1|
(Eq. 6-17)
where
MAG is in dB,
K is the stability factor calculated using Equation 6-15.
The reason B1 had to be calculated ﬁrst is because its polarity
determines which sign (±) to use before the radical in Equation
6-17. If B1 is negative, use the plus sign. If B1 is positive, use
the minus sign.
Note that K must be greater than 1 (unconditionally stable) or
Equation 6-17 will be undeﬁned. That is, for a K less than 1, the
radical in the equation will produce an imaginary number and
the MAG calculation is no longer valid. Thus, MAG is undeﬁned
for unstable transistors.
Simultaneous Conjugate Match (Unconditionally
Stable Transistors)
Once a suitable stable transistor has been found, and its gain
capabilities have been found to match your requirements, you
can proceed with the design.
The following design procedures will result in load and source
reﬂection coefﬁcients that will provide a conjugate match for the
actual output and input impedances, respectively, of the transis-
tor. Remember that the actual output impedance of a transistor is
dependent upon the source impedance that the transistor “sees.”
Conversely, the actual input impedance of the transistor is depen-
dent upon the load impedance that the transistor “sees.” This
dependency is, of course, caused by the reverse gain of the tran-
sistor (S12). If S12 were equal to zero, then the load and source
impedances would have no effect on the transistor’s input and
output impedances.
To ﬁnd the desired load reﬂection coefﬁcient for a conjugate
match, perform the following calculations:
C2 = S22 −(DSS∗
(Eq. 6-18)
where the asterisk indicates the complex conjugate of S11 (same
magnitude, but angle has the opposite sign). The quantity DS is
the intermediate quantity as calculated in Equation 6-14.
Next, calculate B2.
B2 = 1 + |S22|2 −|S11|2 −|DS|2
(Eq. 6-19)
The magnitude of the reﬂection coefﬁcient is then found from
the equation:
|L| =
B2 ±
2 −4|C2|2
2|C2|
(Eq. 6-20)
The sign preceding the radical is the opposite of the sign of B2
(which was previously calculated in Equation 6-19). The angle
of the load-reﬂection coefﬁcient is simply the negative of the
angle of C2 (found in Equation 6-18).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Design Using S Parameters
Once the desired load-reﬂection coefﬁcient is found, it can be
plotted on a Smith Chart, and the corresponding load impedance
can be found directly. Or, if you prefer, you can substitute L
into Equation 5-8, and solve for ZL mathematically.
With the desired load-reﬂection coefﬁcient speciﬁed, you can
now calculate the source-reﬂection coefﬁcient that is needed to
properly terminate the transistor’s input.
S =
S11 +
S12S21L
1 −(L · S22)
(Eq. 6-21)
EXAMPLE 6-4
A transistor has the following S parameters at 200 MHz, with
a VCE = 10 V and an IC = 10 mA:
S11 = 0.4∠162◦
S22 = 0.35∠−39◦
S12 = 0.04∠60◦
S21 = 5.2∠63◦
The ampliﬁer must operate between 50-ohm terminations.
Design input and output matching networks to simultaneously
conjugate match the transistor for maximum gain.
Solution
First use Equations 6-14 and 6-15 to see if the transistor is
stable at the operating frequency and bias point:
Ds = (0.4∠162◦)(0.35∠−39◦) −(0.04∠60◦)(5.2∠63◦)
= 0.14∠123◦−0.208∠123◦
= 0.068∠−57◦
Use the magnitude of DS to calculate K.
K = 1 + (0.068)2 −(0.4)2 −(0.35)2
2(5.2)(0.04)
= 1.74
Since K is greater than 1, the transistor is unconditionally
stable and we may proceed with the design. Next, calculate B1
using Equation 6-16.
B1 = 1 + (0.4)2 −(0.35)2 −(0.068)2
= 1.03
The Maximum Available Gain is then given by Equation 6-17:
MAG = 10 log 5.2
0.04 + 10 log |1.74 −
(1.74)2 −1|
= 21.14 + (−5)
= 16.1 dB
The negative sign shown in front of the radical in the above
equation results from B1 being positive.
If the design speciﬁcation had called out a minimum gain
greater than 16.1 dB, a different transistor would be needed.
We will consider 16.1 dB adequate for our purposes.
The next step is to ﬁnd the load-reﬂection coefﬁcient needed
for a conjugate match. The two intermediate quantities (C2
and B2) must ﬁrst be found. From Equation 6-18:
C2 = 0.35∠−39◦) −[(0.068∠−57◦)(0.4∠−162◦)]
= 0.272 −j0.22 −[−0.021 + j0.0017]
= 0.377∠−39◦
and, from Equation 6-19:
B2 = 1 + (0.35)2 −(0.4)2 −(0.068)2
= 0.958
Therefore, the magnitude of the load-reﬂection coefﬁcient
can now be found using Equation 6-20.
|L| =
0.958 −
(0.958)2 −4(0.377)2
2(0.377)
= 0.487
The angle of the load-reﬂection coefﬁcient is simply equal to
the negative of the angle of C2, or +39◦. Thus,
L = 0.487∠39◦
Using L, calculate S using Equation 6-21:
S =
0.4∠162◦+ (0.04∠60◦)(5.2∠63◦)(0.487∠39◦)
1 −(0.487∠39◦)(0.35∠−39◦)
= [0.522∠−162◦]∗
= 0.522∠162◦
Continued on next page
The asterisk again indicates that you should take the conjugate of
the quantity in brackets (same magnitude, but opposite sign for
the angle). In other words, once you complete the calculation
(within the brackets) of Equation 6-21, the magnitude of the
result will be correct, but the angle will have the wrong sign.
Simply change the sign of the angle.
Once S is found, it can either be plotted on a Smith Chart
or substituted into Equation 5-8 to ﬁnd the corresponding
source impedance. An example should help clarify matters
(Example 6-4).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
EXAMPLE 6-4—Cont
FIG. 6-20.
Input network-design values for Example 6-4. For a more detailed full color view of this ﬁgure, please visit our companion site
at http://books.elsevier.com/companions/9780750685184.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Design Using S Parameters
EXAMPLE 6-4—Cont
FIG. 6-21.
Output network-design values for Example 6-4. For a more detailed full color view of this ﬁgure, please visit our companion
site at http://books.elsevier.com/companions/9780750685184.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
EXAMPLE 6-4—Cont
Once the desired S and L are known, all that remains is to
surround the transistor with components that provide it with
source and load impedances which “look like” S and L.
The input matching-network design is shown on the Smith
Chart of Fig. 6-20. The object of the design is to force the
50-ohm source to present a reﬂection coefﬁcient of
0.522∠−162◦. With S plotted as shown, the corresponding
desired and normalized impedance is read directly from the
chart as ZS = 0.32 −j0.14 ohm. Remember, this is a
normalized impedance because the chart has been
normalized to 50 ohms. The actual impedance represented by
S is equal to 50(0.32 −j0.14) = 16 −j7 ohms. To force the
50-ohm source to actually appear as a 16 −j7 ohm impedance
to the transistor, we merely add a shunt and a series reactive
component as shown on the chart of Fig. 6-20. Proceeding
from the source, we have:
Arc AB = Shunt C = j1.45 mhos
Arc BC = Series L = j0.33 ohm
The actual component values are found using Equations 4-12
and 4-13.
C1 =
1.45
2π(200 × 106)50
= 23 pF
L1 =
(0.33)(50)
2π(200 × 106)
= 13 nH
This completes the input matching network.
The load-reﬂection coefﬁcient is plotted in Fig. 6-21 and
represents a desired load impedance (as read from the chart)
of ZL −50(1.6 + j1.28) ohms, or 80 + j64 ohms. The matching
network is designed as follows. Proceeding from the load:
Arc AB = Series C = −j1.3 ohms
Arc BC = Shunt L = −j0.78 mho
Component values are now found using Equations 4-11
and 4-14.
C2 =
2π(200 × 106)(1.3)(50)
= 12 pF
L2 =
2π(200 × 106)(0.78)
= 51 nH
The ﬁnal design, excluding bias circuitry, is shown in Fig. 6-22.
50 
50 
13 nH
23 pF
12 pF
51nH
FIG. 6-22.
Final circuit for Example 6-4.
Transducer Gain
The transducer gain, as deﬁned earlier in this chapter, is the
actual gain of an ampliﬁer stage including the effects of input
and output matching and device gain. It does not include losses
attributed to power dissipation in imperfect components.
Transducer gain is found by
GT =
|S21|2(1 −|S|2)(1 −|L|2)
|(1 −S11S)(1 −S22L) −S12S21LS|2
(Eq. 6-22)
where
S and L are the source- and load-reﬂection coefﬁcients,
respectively.
Calculation of GT is a useful method of checking the power gain
of an ampliﬁer before it is built. This is shown by Example 6-5.
EXAMPLE 6-5
Calculate the transducer gain of the ampliﬁer that was
designed in Example 6-4.
Solution
Using Equation 6-22, we have:
GT =
(5.2)2(1 −(0.522)2)(1 −(0.487)2)
|(1 −0.2088)(1 −0.170) −(0.04∠60◦)(5.2∠63◦)
× (0.487∠39◦)(0.522∠−162◦)2|
= 41.15
= 16.1 dB

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Design Using S Parameters
Notice, again, that the transducer gain calculates to be very close
to the MAG. If you carry the calculation out to several decimal
places, you will ﬁnd that GT is still less than the MAG by a few
hundredths of a dB. This is due to the fact that S12 is not equal
to zero and is, therefore, providing a slight amount of negative
feedback internal to the transistor.
Design for a Speciﬁed Gain
Often, when designing ampliﬁers, it is required that a single
stage provide a certain amount of gain—no more and no less. In
a situation such as this, a simultaneous conjugate match for the
transistor would probably provide too much gain for the stage
and would probably overdrive its load (or the succeeding stage).
Obviously, if you so desired, you could search through moun-
tains of manufacturer’s literature hoping to ﬁnd a transistor that,
when conjugately matched, would provide exactly the amount
of gain desired. This approach could take weeks or even months.
Even if you did ﬁnd a transistor with exactly the gain needed, you
are now at the mercy of the manufacturer and are subject to any
and all gain variations among transistors of the same type. There
is a better way, however, and it alleviates the above problems
very easily. It is called selective mismatching.
Selective mismatching is simply a controlled manageable way
of decreasing gain by not matching the transistor to its load.
This may sound like heresy to some, but it is a practical, logical,
and well-accepted design procedure. There are still those who
believe that at RF frequencies, a transistor must be matched to its
source and load impedance. This is just not true. A transistor is
simultaneously conjugate matched to its source and load only if
maximumgainisdesired, withoutregardforanyotherparameter,
such as noise ﬁgure and bandwidth.
One of the easiest methods of selectively mismatching a transis-
tor is through the use of a constant-gain circle as plotted on a
SmithChart.Aconstant-gaincircleissimplyacircle, thecircum-
ference of which represents a locus of points (load impedances)
thatwillforcetheampliﬁergaintoaspeciﬁedvalue. Forinstance,
any of the inﬁnite number of impedances located on the circum-
ference of a 10-dB constant-gain circle would force the ampliﬁer
stage gain to 10 dB. Once the circle is drawn on a Smith Chart,
either via manual techniques or the use of a computerized Smith
Chart tool, you can see the load impedances that will provide a
desired gain.
A constant-gain circle is plotted on a Smith Chart by performing
a few calculations to determine:
1. Where the center of the circle is located.
2. The radius of the circle.
This information is calculated as follows:
1. Calculate DS using Equation 6-14.
2. Calculate D2.
D2 = |S22|2 −|DS|2
(Eq. 6-23)
3. Calculate C2.
C2 = S22 −DSS∗
(Eq. 6-24)
4. Calculate G.
G = Gain desired (absolute)
|S21|2
(Eq. 6-25)
Note that the numerator in Equation 6-25 must be an
absolute gain and not a gain in dB.
5. Calculate the location of the center of the circle.
ro =
1 + D2G
(Eq. 6-26)
6. Calculate the radius of the circle.
po =
1 −2K|S12S21|G + |S12S21|2G2
1 + D2G
(Eq. 6-27)
Equation 6-26 produces a complex number in magnitude-angle
format similar to a reﬂection coefﬁcient. This number is plot-
ted on the chart exactly as you would plot a value of reﬂection
coefﬁcient.
The radius of the circle that is calculated with Equation 6-27
is simply a fractional number between 0 and 1 which repre-
sents the size of that circle in relation to a Smith Chart. A
circle with a radius of 1 has the same radius as a Smith Chart,
a radius of 0.5 represents half the radius of a Smith Chart,
and so on.
Once you choose the load-reﬂection coefﬁcient and, hence, the
load impedance that you will use, the next step is to determine
the value of source-reﬂection coefﬁcient that is needed to com-
plete the design without producing any further decrease in gain.
This value of source-reﬂection coefﬁcient is the conjugate of the
actual input reﬂection coefﬁcient of the transistor with the spec-
iﬁed load and is given by Equation 6-21. Example 6-6 outlines
the procedure to follow.
Stability Circles
When the Rollett stability factor, as calculated with Equation
6-15, indicates a potential instability with the transistor, the
chances are that with some combination of source and load
impedance, the transistor will oscillate. Therefore, when K cal-
culates to be less than 1, it is extremely important to choose
source and load impedances very carefully. One of the best meth-
ods of determining those source and load impedances that will
cause the transistor to go unstable is to plot stability circles on a
Smith Chart. Again, this can be accomplished via manual tech-
niques or through the use of computerized Smith Chart tools as
discussed in Chapter 4.
A stability circle is simply a circle on a Smith Chart that rep-
resents the boundary between those values of source or load
impedance that cause instability and those that do not. The
perimeter of the circle thus represents the locus of points which
forces K = 1. Either the inside or the outside of the circle may

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
EXAMPLE 6-6
A transistor has the following S parameters at 250 MHz, with
a VCE = 5 V and IC = 5 mA.
S11 = 0.277∠−59◦
S22 = 0.848∠−31◦
S12 = 0.078∠93◦
S21 = 1.92∠64◦
Design an ampliﬁer to provide 9 dB of gain at 250 MHz. The
source impedance is ZS = 35 −j60 ohms and the load
impedance is ZL = 50 −j50 ohms. The transistor is
unconditionally stable with K = 1.033.
Solution
Using Equation 6-14 and Equations 6-23 through 6-27, and
proceeding “by the numbers,” we have:
DS = S11S22 −S12S21
= (0.277∠−59◦)(0.848∠−31◦)
−(0.078∠93◦)(1.92∠64◦)
= 0.324∠−64.8◦
D2 = (0.848)2−(0.324)2
= 0.614
C2 = 0.848∠−31◦−(0.324∠−64.8◦)(0.277∠59◦)
= 0.768∠−33.9◦
7.94
(1.92)2
= 2.15
The center of the circle is then located at the point:
ro = 2.15(0.768∠33.9◦)
1 + (0.614)(2.15)
= 0.712∠33.9◦
This point can now be plotted on the Smith Chart.
The radius of the 9-dB gain circle is calculated as:
po =
1 −2(1.033)(0.078)(1.92)(2.15) + (0.150)2(2.15)2
1 + (0.614)(2.15)
= 0.285
The Smith Chart construction is shown in Fig. 6-23. Note that
any load impedance located along the circumference of the
circle will produce an ampliﬁer gain of 9 dB if the input
impedance of the transistor is conjugate matched.
The actual load impedance we have to work with is
50 −j50 ohms, as given in the problem statement. Its
normalized value (1 −j1) is shown in Fig. 6-23 (point A). The
transistor’s output network must transform the actual load
impedance into a value that falls on the constant-gain circle.
Obviously, there are numerous circuit conﬁgurations that will
do the trick. The conﬁguration shown was chosen for
convenience. Proceeding from the load:
Arc AB = Series C = −j2 ohms
Arc BC = Shunt L = −j0.425 mho
Again, using Equations 4-11 through 4-14, the actual
component values are:
C1 =
2π(250 × 106)(2)(50)
= 6.4 pF
L1 =
(50)
2π(250 × 106)(0.425)
= 75 nH
For a conjugate match at the input to the transistor with
L = 0.82∠14.2◦(point C), the desired source-reﬂection
coefﬁcient must be (using Equation 6-21):
S =
0.277∠−59◦+ (0.078∠93◦)(1.92∠64◦)(0.82∠14.2◦)
1 −(0.82∠14.2◦)(0.848∠31◦)
= 0.105∠160◦
This point is plotted as point D in Fig. 6-24. The actual
normalized source impedance is plotted at point A
(0.7 −j1.2 ohms). Thus, the input network must transform the
actual impedance at point A to the desired impedance at
point D. For practice, this was done with a three-element
design as shown.
Arc AB = Shunt C2 = j0.62 mho
Arc BC = Series L2 = j1.09 ohms
Arc CD = Shunt C3 = j2.1 mhos
Continued on next page

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Design Using S Parameters
EXAMPLE 6-6—Cont
FIG. 6-23.
Output network-design values for Example 6-6. For a more detailed full color view of this ﬁgure, please visit our companion
site at http://books.elsevier.com/companions/9780750685184.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
EXAMPLE 6-6—Cont
FIG. 6-24.
Input network-design values for Example 6-6. For a more detailed full color view of this ﬁgure, please visit our companion site
at http://books.elsevier.com/companions/9780750685184.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Design Using S Parameters
EXAMPLE 6-6—Cont
From Equations 4-11 through 4-14:
C2 =
(0.62)
2π(250 × 106)(50)
= 7.9 pF
C3 =
2π(250 × 106)50
= 27 pF
L2 =
(1.09)(50)
2π(250 × 106)
= 34.7 nH
The completed design, excluding the bias network, is shown
in Fig. 6-25.
75 nH
34.7 nH
27 pF
6.4 pF
7.9 pF
FIG. 6-25.
Final circuit for Example 6-6.
represent the unstable region and that determination must be
made after the circles are drawn.
The locations and radii of the input and output stability circles
are found as follows:
1. Calculate DS using Equation 6-14.
2. Calculate C1.
C1 = S11 −DSS∗
(Eq. 6-28)
3. Calculate C2 using Equation 6-18.
4. Calculate the center location of the input stability circle.
rs1 =
|S11|2 −|DS|2
(Eq. 6-29)
5. Calculate the radius of the input stability circle.
ps1 =

S12S21
|S11|2 −|DS|2

(Eq. 6-30)
6. Calculate the center location of the output stability circle.
rs2 =
|S22|2 −|DS|2
(Eq. 6-31)
7. Calculate the radius of the output stability circle.
ps2 =

S12S21
|S22|2 −|DS|2

(Eq. 6-32)
Once the calculations are made, the stability circles can be plot-
ted directly on the Smith Chart. Note, however, that if you try to
plot stability circles on the Smith Chart for an unconditionally
stable transistor, you may never ﬁnd them. This is because for
an unconditionally stable ampliﬁer the entire chart represents a
stable operating region, as shown in Fig. 6-26.
Input
Stability Circle
Smith
Chart
Unstable
Region
Output Stability Circle
FIG. 6-26.
Typical stability circles for an unconditionally stable ampliﬁer.
For a potentially unstable transistor, the stability circles might
resemble those shown in Fig. 6-27. Often, only a portion of the
stability circle intersects the chart as shown.
After the stability circles are plotted on the chart, the next step
is to determine which side of the circle (inside or outside) rep-
resents the stable region. This is very easily done if S11 and S22
for the transistor are less than 1. Since the S parameters were
measured with a 50-ohm source and load, and since the tran-
sistor remained stable under these conditions (S11 or S22 would
be greater than 1 for an unstable transistor), then the center of
the normalized Smith Chart must be part of the stable region
as described by the stability circles. Therefore, in this case, if
one of the circles surrounds the center of the chart, the inside
of that circle must represent the region of stable impedances for
that port. If, on the other hand, the circle does not surround the
center of the chart, then the entire area outside of that circle must
represent the stable operating region for that port.
It is very rare that you will ﬁnd a transistor that is unstable with a
50-ohm source and load and, if you do, it would probably be wise

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
FIG. 6-27.
Typical stability circles for a potentially unstable transistor. For a more detailed full color view of this ﬁgure, please visit our companion site at
http://books.elsevier.com/companions/9780750685184.
to try another device. Therefore, the procedure outlined above
should be considered to be the most direct method of locating the
stable operating regions on a Smith Chart. Example 6-7 diagrams
the procedure.
Design for Optimum Noise Figure
The noise ﬁgure of any two-port network gives a measure of
the amount of noise that is added to a signal that is transmitted
throughthenetwork. Foranypracticalcircuit, thesignal-to-noise

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Design Using S Parameters
ratio at its output will be worse (smaller) than that at its input. In
most circuit-design applications, however, it is possible to min-
imize the noise contribution of each two-port network through a
judicious choice of operating point and source resistance.
In Chapter 5, it was brieﬂy mentioned that for each transis-
tor, indeed for each two-port network, there exists an optimum
source resistance necessary to establish a minimum noise ﬁgure
(see alsoAppendix B). Many manufacturers specify an optimum
source resistance on the data sheet, such as in the case of the
2N5179 transistor presented in Chapter 5. Others will specify an
optimum source-reﬂection coefﬁcient. Such is the case for the
Microwave Associates’ MA-42120-Series transistor data sheet
EXAMPLE 6-7
The S parameters for a 2N5179 transistor at 200 MHz, with a
VCE = 6 V and an IC = 5 mA, are (see the data sheet in
Chapter 5):
S11 = 0.4∠280◦
S22 = 0.78∠345◦
S12 = 0.048∠65◦
S21 = 5.4∠103◦
Choose a stable load- and source-reﬂection coefﬁcient that
will provide a power gain of 12 dB at 200 MHz.
Solution
A calculation of Rollett’s stability factor (K) for the transistor
indicates a potential instability with K = 0.802. Therefore, you
must exercise extreme caution in choosing source and load
impedances for the device or it may oscillate. To ﬁnd the
stable operating regions on the Smith Chart, plot the input
and output stability circles. Proceeding with Step 1, above, we
have:
DS = (0.4∠280◦)(0.75∠345◦) −(0.048∠65◦) (5.4∠103◦)
= 0.429∠−58.18◦
C1 = 0.4∠280◦−(0.429∠−58.2◦)(0.78∠−345◦)
= 0.241∠−136.6◦
C2 = 0.78∠345◦−(0.429∠−58.2◦)(0.4∠−280◦)
= 0.65∠−24◦
Then, the center of the input stability circle is located at the
point:
rs1 =
0.241∠136.6◦
(0.4)2 −(0.429)2
= 10∠136.6◦
The radius of the circle is calculated as:
ps1 =

(0.048∠65◦)(5.4∠103◦)
(0.4)2 −(0.429)2

= 10.78
Similarly, for the output stability circle:
rs2 =
0.65∠24◦
(0.78)2 −(0.429)2
= 1.53∠24◦
ps2 =

(0.048∠65◦)(5.4∠103◦)
(0.78)2 −(0.429)2

= 0.610
These circles are shown in Fig. 6-28. Note that the input
stability circle is actually drawn as a straight line because the
radius of the circle is so large. Since S11 and S22 are both less
than 1, we can deduce that the inside of the input stability
circle represents the region of stable source impedances while
the outside of the output stability circle represents the region
of stable load impedances for the device.
The 12-dB gain circle is also shown plotted in Fig. 6-28. It is
found using Equation 6-14 and Equations 6-23 through 6-27.
Note that DS and C2 have already been calculated. The center
location of the circle is found to be:
ro = 0.287∠24◦
with a radius of:
po = 0.724
The only load impedances that we may not select for the
transistor are located inside of the input stability circle. Any
other load impedance located on the 12-dB gain circle will
Continued on next page
that is shown in Fig. 6-29. Note the Smith Chart, on page 3 of the
data sheet, labeled “Typical Optimum Noise Source Impedance
vs. Collector Current.” Obviously, as shown on the chart, if you
were planning to use the transistor at some frequency other than
60 MHz or 450 MHz, you would be out of luck as far as optimum
noise-ﬁgure design is concerned. Typically, most data sheets are
incomplete like this. There is just not enough space in a typical
data book to provide the user with all of the information that he
needs in order to design ampliﬁers at every possible frequency
and bias point. The data sheet is meant only as a starting point in
any design. Chances are you will end up making many of your
own measurements on a device before it becomes a part of the
design.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
EXAMPLE 6-7—Cont
FIG. 6-28.
Stability and gain circles for the transistor in Example 6-7. For a more detailed full color view of this ﬁgure, please visit our
companion site at http://books.elsevier.com/companions/9780750685184.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Design Using S Parameters
EXAMPLE 6-7—Cont
FIG. 6-29.
Data sheet for Microwave Associates’ MA-42120 series of transistors. (Courtesy Microwave Associates).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
EXAMPLE 6-7—Cont
FIG. 6-29.
(Continued).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Design Using S Parameters
EXAMPLE 6-7—Cont
FIG. 6-29.
(Continued).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
EXAMPLE 6-7—Cont
FIG. 6-29.
(Continued).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Design Using S Parameters
EXAMPLE 6-7—Cont
FIG. 6-29.
(Continued).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
EXAMPLE 6-7—Cont
FIG. 6-29.
(Continued).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Design Using S Parameters
EXAMPLE 6-7—Cont
provide the needed gain as long as the input of the device is
conjugately matched and as long as the impedance required
for a conjugate match falls inside of the input stability circle.
Choose L equal to a convenient value on the 12-dB gain
circle.
L = 0.89∠70◦
Using Equation 6-21, calculate the source-reﬂection
coefﬁcient needed for a conjugate match and plot this point
on the Smith Chart.
S = 0.678∠79.4◦
Notice that S falls within the stable region of the input
stability circle and, therefore, represents a stable termination
for the transistor.
On page 2 of the data sheet, you will ﬁnd a set of curves labeled
“Typical Optimum N.F. vs. Collector Current.” Note that for this
particular device, at 450 MHz, the optimum collector current for
minimum noise ﬁgure is approximately 1.5 mA. This value of
collector current should result in a noise ﬁgure of just above 2 dB.
Again, the data is presented for only 60 MHz and 450 MHz.
Designing ampliﬁers for a minimum noise ﬁgure is simply a
matter of determining, either experimentally or from the data
sheet, the source resistance and the bias point that produce the
minimum noise ﬁgure for the device (Example 6-8). Once deter-
mined, the actual source impedance is simply forced to “look
like” the optimum value. Of course, all stability considerations
still apply. If the Rollett stability factor (K) calculates to be less
than 1, then you must be careful in your choice of source- and
EXAMPLE 6-8
It has been determined that the optimum bias point for
minimum noise ﬁgure for a transistor is VCE = 10 V and
IC = 5 mA. Its optimum source-reﬂection coefﬁcient, as given
on the data sheet, is:
S = 0.7∠140◦
The S parameters for the transistor, under the given bias
conditions at 200 MHz, are:
S11 = 0.4∠162◦
S22 = 0.35∠−39◦
S12 = 0.04∠60◦
S21 = 5.2∠63◦
Design a low-noise ampliﬁer to operate between a 75-ohm
source and a 100-ohm load at 200 MHz. What gain can you
expect from the ampliﬁer when it is built?
Solution
The Rollett stability factor (K) calculates to be 1.74 which
indicates unconditional stability (Equation 6-15). Therefore,
we may proceed with the design. The design values of the
input-matching network are shown in Fig. 6-30. Here the
normalized 75-ohm source resistance is transformed to S
using two components.
Arc AB = Shunt C = j1.7 mhos
Arc BC = Series L = j0.86 ohm
Using Equations 4-11 through 4-14, the component values
are calculated to be:
C1 =
(50)(2π)(200 × 106)
= 27 pF
L1 =
(0.86) (50)
2π(200 × 106)
= 34 nH
The load-reﬂection coefﬁcient needed to properly terminate
the transistor is then found using Equation 6-33.
L =
0.35∠−39◦+ (0.04∠60◦) (5.2∠63◦) (0.7∠140◦)
1 −(0.4∠162◦) (0.7∠140◦)
= 0.427∠60.7◦
Continued on next page
load-reﬂection coefﬁcients. It is best, in this case, to draw the
stability circles for an accurate graphical indication of where the
unstable regions lie.
After providing the transistor with its optimum source
impedance, the next step is to determine the optimum load-
reﬂection coefﬁcient needed to properly terminate the transis-
tor’s output. This is given by:
L =
S22 + S12S21S
1 −S11S
(Eq. 6-33)
where
S is the source-reﬂection coefﬁcient for minimum noise ﬁgure.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
EXAMPLE 6-8—Cont
FIG. 6-30.
Input network-design values for Example 6-8. For a more detailed full color view of this ﬁgure, please visit our companion site
at http://books.elsevier.com/companions/9780750685184.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Design Using S Parameters
EXAMPLE 6-8—Cont
FIG. 6-31.
Output network-design values for Example 6-8. For a more detailed full color view of this ﬁgure, please visit our companion
site at http://books.elsevier.com/companions/9780750685184.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
EXAMPLE 6-8
This value, along with the normalized load-resistance value, is
plotted in Fig. 6-31. The 100-ohm load must be transformed
into L. One possible method is shown in Fig. 6-31. Note that
a single shunt inductor provides the necessary impedance
transformation:
Arc AB = Shunt L = −j0.48 mho
Again using Equations 4-11 through 4-14, the inductor’s value
is found to be:
L2 =
2π(200 × 106) (0.48)
= 83 nH
The ﬁnal design, including a typical bias network, is shown in
Fig. 6-32. The 0.1-μF capacitors are used only as bypass and
coupling elements. The gain of the ampliﬁer, as calculated
with Equation 6-22, is 13.3 dB.
83 nH
34 nH
27 pF
93 K
100 
75 
0.1 F
0.1F
FIG. 6-32.
Final circuit for Example 6-8.
Design Example
Many of the techniques discussed in this chapter can be accom-
plished using software design tools. To better illustrate this
fact, consider the design of a low-noise ampliﬁer block that
will be used in a dual-band down converter. The design is
completed using the Genesys environment from Agilent Tech-
nologies (www.agilent.com/ﬁnd/eesof). Genesys software is an
integrated electronic design automation (EDA) platform for RF
and microwave design. It features a design ﬂow that spans from
initial system architecture through ﬁnal documentation, and pro-
vides state-of-the-art performance in a single easy-to-use design
environment that is fast, powerful, and accurate.
A summary of the design speciﬁcations and goals are shown in
Table 6-1. Note that the required gain of 30 dB will exceed the
capability of most active single devices; therefore our design will
require a minimum of two devices with transducer gains equal
to or greater than 15 dB each. The combination of gain, noise
Frequency Range
2200–2600 MHz 400 MHz BW
Gain
30 dB ± 1 dB
Noise Figure
<2 dB
Input/Output Match
−20 dB
P1dB
0 dBm
PSat
+3 dBm
+10 dBm
TABLE 6-1.
Design speciﬁcations
ﬁgure, power and match will prove to be challenging. NEC’s
NE23418 device was chosen because it will provide >17 dB
gain at 2400 MHz with a noise ﬁgure of less than 1 dB.
To begin, open the Genesys workspace and select the NE23418
part from the NEC SPICE Parts library. Place the selected part on
the schematic. Then place the bias components on the schematic
along with the sources and ports as shown in Fig. 6-33. The
component values are listed in Table 6-2.
The next step requires us to simulate the circuit to extract the bias
values and linear S-parameters. To do this, select Analyses/Add
LinearAnalysis. When the linear analysis dialog appears, set the
R36000
R9000 
VDC2V
IDC5.691 mA
L250nH
C100pF
Port_2
ZO50
L250nH
Port 1
ZO50 
C100pF
FIG. 6-33.
Design schematic.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Design Using S Parameters
36000
9000
250 nH
250 nH
100 pF
100 pF
TABLE 6-2.
Component values
start and stop frequencies at 1500 MHz to 3000 MHz with 101
points. Accept the remaining default settings. DC analysis and
linear circuit simulation will take place automatically.
When the simulation is complete, right click on the output port
in the schematic and select S[2,1] as a measurement to graph.
When the graph appears, double click anywhere on the graph’s
surface to bring up the graph’s properties dialog. Select the Mea-
surement Wizard button, then Linear1_Data which points to the
dataset. This will bring up a third dialog, allowing the choice of
measurement to plot. Select NFMIN for noise ﬁgure and com-
plete the action by pressing the Finish button and accepting the
subsequent selections. After closing the graph properties, your
graph should resemble Fig. 6-34.
Gain  NFmin
1500 1650 1800 1950 2100 2250
Frequency (MHz)
1.05
1.034
1.018
1.002
0.986
0.97
0.954
0.938
0.922
0.906
0.89
2400 2550 2700 2850 3000
19.5
18.5
17.5
16.5
15.5
2400MHz, 0974 dB
2400MHz, 17.119 dB
S[2,1]
S[2,1] (dB)
NFMIN (dB)
NFMIN
FIG. 6-34.
Measurement plot.
Click on the graph line to attach a marker. The value of gain
should be approximately 17 dB with less than 1 dB noise ﬁgure.
Next we will plot circles of constant noise ﬁgure as well as Gopt,
S11, S22 and input and output stability circles. To do this, select
Graphs/Add Smith Chart to launch the Smith Chart graph. Dou-
ble click on the chart to bring up the graph properties. Next
select the Measurement Wizard button, and the Linear1_Data
set to bring up the measurements dialog. Scroll down the selec-
tion until the measurement NCI constant noise circles are found.
Select this measurement and accept the results. Close the graph
dialog and view the graph. What you are viewing is Gopt, which
is the optimum reﬂection coefﬁcient for minimum noise over the
analysis frequency range. To view the group of constant noise
circles, click on the plot. Where the marker falls will dictate the
frequency for these circles. With the marker activated, use the
cursor to tune across the band and note how the position and
diameter of the circles vary. The circles represent the locus of
constant noise ﬁgure. From Genesys help, you will read that
the ﬁrst circle represents a degradation of .25 dB, followed by
.5 dB, then 1 dB, 1.5 dB and so forth. Note that if we choose to
terminate the input of our ampliﬁer with a 50-ohm termination,
the noise ﬁgure would be degraded by less than .25 dB above the
minimum noise ﬁgure.
Add another Smith Chart as before; however, this time we will
plot Gopt, S11, S22 and input and output stability circles. To
save time, enter the measurements to plot directly on the graph
properties dialog screen. For completeness, the measurements
are S11, S22, Gopt, SB1, and SB2 for the stability circles. Close
the graph properties dialog. Use the Window/Tile function to
place all four windows evenly on the screen. Your workspace
should resemble Fig. 6-35.
Double click on the DC source in the schematic SG1, check the
tune box and close. Using the Tune window, vary the source
voltage from 1 to 3V and note the change in linear parameters
as well as stability circles. As the bias is increased, the stability
circles approach the unit circle, allowing for easier matching but
lower noise ﬁgure. Reset the voltage to 2V, which provides the
recommended gain and required noise ﬁgure. The fact that there
are stability circles inside the unit circle and not enclosing the
center tells us that we cannot present loads or sources in these
regions; otherwise there is a potential for oscillation. In other
words, we cannot provide a simultaneous conjugate match at
both the input and output of our device. This is also evident by
plotting the stability factor K from the measurements available
in our graphs or tables. The implication is we cannot achieve
Gmax for our device, but instead something close to Gmsg or
maximum stable gain.
Having completed device selection, bias and linear evaluation,
we will now use the basic biased stage for incorporation into a
two-stage design. Select Synthesis/Add Impedance Match from
the menu to bring up the MATCH dialog. Select the start and
stop frequencies over which we wish to match our ampliﬁer. Set
the lower frequency to 2200 MHz and the upper to 2400 MHz
with the number of points 50. Press the Sections tab to bring up
the network/topology window and settings. Accept the default
of 50 ohms for input and output terminations.
With the input port selected, click on theAdd Device button. This
will add a generic two port block to our topology. The Type drop-
down selection allows us to determine where the block will get
its data from. For this exercise we will use the sub circuit that
was built previously. Select the Design option from the Type
drop-down and then from the Design drop-down select “SCH1”
whichisthenameofthebiasednetwork. Next, clickontheoutput

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
FIG. 6-35.
Plots of stability circles.
port to activate it and then select the Add Device button to place
our second stage in the topology. As above, select Design in the
Type drop-down and point it to the same sub network “SCH1”.
Select the middle default matching network “LCPi”. From the
Type drop-down select “LC Bandpass”. Insure that the Options
drop-down shows “No Transformer” and the Order is set to 2.
The topology should resemble that of Fig. 6-36.
Next, double click on the optimization icon. Select the Goals
tab from the Optimization dialog box. Add an additional mea-
surement of S21 to the goals properties and set its value to be
equal to 30 dB. Also reset the goals for S11 and S22 to −15 dB
along with their corresponding weights. Close the Optimization
dialog.
Press the Calculate button on the MATCH properties dialog to
have Genesys calculate the inter-stage matching structure. After
a few seconds MATCH has generated a schematic with inter-
stage topology and the associated devices in symbol form. In
the matching circuit schematic, right click on the output port
and select Add New Graph/Table/New Graph of S21. This will
generate a rectangular plot of gain vs. frequency for our two-
stage ampliﬁer. Refer to Fig. 6-37.
Double click on the new graph to open its Properties dialog. Add
a new measurement by typing in “NF” for noise ﬁgure in the ﬁeld
below “S[2,1]”. Make sure that the NF measurement check box
On Right is checked to display the noise ﬁgure on the right axis.
Close the dialog; your graph should resemble Fig. 6-38.
The unoptimized gain varies from approximately 37.6 to 34.8 dB
with a corresponding match of −.6 dB to approximately −2 dB
worst case across our band. Press the Optimize button on the
MATCH dialog to start the optimizer. After several seconds to a
minute the error window should approach a value of 3–5 which
will be the best to expect from the combination of goals and
topology. The gain has been ﬂattened to 30 dB ± .1 dB, well
within the speciﬁcation of ±1 dB. The noise ﬁgure has remained
less than 2 dB across the band (approximately 1.07 maximum).
Input and output match are still short of our goal of −20 dB
across the band, but we have several options in this respect. We
can add additional networks to the input and output or we can use
a method involving couplers to improve broadband matching.
Fig. 6-39 shows the gain, noise ﬁgure and matching achieved.
Reviewing the design goals at this point, we ﬁnd that we have
met the gain and noise ﬁgure requirements but fall short of
the matching requirements by 4 dB. Unfortunately, for devices
exhibiting marginal stability, improving match at one port
degrades the match at the other. An obvious step would be
to substitute our design into the dual-band receiver in which

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Design Using S Parameters
FIG. 6-36.
Match properties screen.
Port_1
ZO50 Ω
Port_2
ZO50 Ω
L4.654 nH
L0.946 nH
L1.229 nH
C2.451 pF
C12.962 pF
C0.021 pF
C7.276 pF
FIG. 6-37.
Inter-stage topology schematic.
Match1_Analysis S21
S[2,1](dB)
37.6
37.2
36.8
36.4
2200 2240 2280 2320 2360
S[2,1]
2400
Frequency (MHz)
2440 2480 2520 2560 2600
1.04
1.043
1.046
1.049
1.052
1.055
1.058
1.061
1.064
1.067
1.07
35.6
35.2
34.8
34.4
2600 MHz, 34.831dB
2600 MHz, 1.069 dB
2200 MHz, 37.642 dB
2200 MHz, 1.043 dB
FIG. 6-38.
Noise ﬁgure graph.
it was speciﬁed. If we ﬁnd that using the ampliﬁer “as is”
in the system block diagram degrades the performance of the
overall system then we must ﬁnd another way to meet the return
loss speciﬁcations. In addition we need to test the nonlinear
performance of the ampliﬁer to insure that power, saturation,
etc., are met. In the Genesys environment, veriﬁcation of
nonlinear performance takes place via the harmonic balance
simulator.Assume that this function is used to determine that our
ampliﬁer has met the +10 dBm TOI requirement.As a result, our
design now meets or exceeds all requirements except the match
speciﬁcation.
The reason for requiring a good match is to ensure that the
ampliﬁer will not cause adverse interaction with connecting
components. Since the ampliﬁer is followed by a ﬁlter and mixer
having a highly reﬂective output can reintroduce signals that will
be remixed, and this may contribute to in-band spurious as well
as degraded gain. Fortunately, in Genesys we have the ability to
place the ampliﬁer, as is, back into the system design to test the
net performance prior to improving on the design.
To tackle the issue of input and output match we have several
alternatives. We could attempt to revisit our matching structure

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
2200
2240
2280
2320
2360
2400
2440
2480
2520
2560
2600
Frequency (MHz)
30.2
30.17
30.14
30.11
30.08
30.05
30.02
29.99
29.96
29.93
29.9
S[2,1] (dB)
S[2,1]
2200
2240
2280
2320
2360
2400
2440
2480
2520
2560
2600
Frequency (MHz)
1.056
1.058
1.059
1.061
1.063
1.065
1.066
1.068
1.07
1.071
1.073
Match1_Analysis S21
2200 MHz, 18.652 dB
2200 MHz, 27.676 dB
2600 MHz, 1.072 dB
2200 MHz, 30.149 dB
NF (dB)
S11, S22 (dB)
2600 MHz, 30.107 dB
2600 MHz, 15.363 dB
2600 MHz, 15 dB
2200 MHz, 1.056 dB
2404.092 MHz, 29.928 dB
2404.082 MHz, 1.062 dB
FIG. 6-39.
Graphs of achieved gain, noise ﬁgure and matching.
and add additional elements to the input and output, but little
would be gained if we still meet our other goals. Secondly, we
could choose another device that might lend itself to a better
overall match with sufﬁcient gain. Third, a circulator or isolator
component could be placed at the input and output. This is the
least attractive because of size and cost. Another technique that
has been used for some time involves a hybrid ampliﬁer scheme
where two identical ampliﬁers are driven in parallel by hybrid or
90◦couplers. The beneﬁt in this conﬁguration is excellent match
across the band, extended power output and suppression of even
or odd harmonics, depending on the implementation. Also, if
one ampliﬁer fails, graceful degradation still provides gain.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C H A P T E R 7
RF (LARGE SIGNAL)
Power Ampliﬁers
n Chapters 5 and 6, we studied the transistor as a small-
signal device. Y and S parameters were introduced as a
means of facilitating ampliﬁer design, and design equations
were provided. When the transistor is used as a large-signal
device, however, these equations are no longer valid. In fact,
bothY and S parameters are called small-signal parameters, and
should not be considered in the design of RF power ampliﬁers.
After looking at basic power transistor characteristics in detail,
we’ll cover the leading semiconductor materials used in today’s
RF power ICs.
RF POWER TRANSISTOR
CHARACTERISTICS
Instead of specifying theY and S parameters for a power transis-
tor, manufacturers will typically specify the large-signal input
impedance and the large-signal output impedance for the device.
These parameters are typically measured on the device when it is
operating as a matched ampliﬁer at the desired DC supply volt-
age and RF power output level.A matched ampliﬁer, in this case,
refers to a condition in which the input and output impedances
are conjugately matched to the source and load, respectively.
The RF Power Transistor Data Sheet
Pertinent design information for RF power transistors is usu-
ally presented in the form of large-signal input and output
impedances, as shown in Fig. 7-1. Fig. 7-1 is a data sheet for
the Freescale (formerly Motorola) MRF233 RF power transistor.
This particular data sheet was chosen for instructional purposes
because it includes both series- and shunt-impedance informa-
tion. This gives the circuit designer the opportunity of using
an impedance format with which he is accustomed, without the
need of converting from one format to the other.
Figure 5, on page 3 of the data sheet, is a Smith Chart rep-
resentation of the series input and output impedance of the
transistor (between 40 and 100 MHz). The information is also
tabulated on the right side of the chart for your convenience.
Note that the impedance is presented in the form Z = R ± jX.
Thus, at 100 MHz, the input impedance of the transistor is
found to be Zin = 1.7 −j2.7 ohms, while the output impedance
is Zout = 5 −j5.6 ohms. This equivalent-series representation
for the transistor is shown in Fig. 7-2.
Figures 6, 7, 8, and 9, of the data sheet present the same
impedance information in parallel form. The input and output
impedance of the transistor are presented as a shunt resistance in
parallel with a capacitor. Thus, referring to Figures 6 and 7 of the
data sheet, the input impedance of the transistor is represented
by a 6-ohm shunt resistor in parallel with a 422-pF capacitor. The
curves of Figures 8 and 9 indicate an equivalent parallel output
impedance for the transistor, which includes an 11.3-ohm resis-
tor in parallel with a 158-pF capacitor, at 100 MHz. These shunt
combinations are shown in the equivalent circuit of Fig. 7-3.
Note that you can perform your own transformation from series
to shunt, and back again, by using Equations 2-6 and 2-7 and,
then, following the procedure of Example 2-2.
Figure 2, on page 3 of the data sheet, is useful in helping you
determine how much input signal power you will need to produce
a given output power. Note that as the frequency of operation
increases, the required input drive level increases. An input
power to the transistor of 1W will produce a 20-W output signal
at 50 MHz (13-dB gain), while, at 90 MHz, that same input level
will produce only 14W out (11.5-dB gain).
Figure 3 presents the same basic information as Figure 2, but in
a different format. Note that the output power decreases as the
frequency of operation increases when given a constant input
power level.
The remainder of the data sheet is straightforward and resembles
that of any typical small-signal transistor.
TRANSISTOR BIASING
The type of bias applied to an RF power transistor is determined
by the “class” of ampliﬁcation that the designer wishes. There are
many different classes of ampliﬁcation available for the designer
to choose from. The particular class chosen for a design will
depend upon the application at hand.
The primary emphasis of this chapter will be on class-C ampli-
ﬁers. However, class-A and class-B ampliﬁer bias arrangements
will also be covered.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
NPN RF Power
FIG. 7-1.
Data sheet. (Courtesy Freescale (formerly Motorola Semiconductor Products Inc.))

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Transistor Biasing
FIG. 7-1.
(Continued)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
FIG. 7-1.
(Continued)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Transistor Biasing
FIG. 7-1.
(Continued)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
j2.7 j5.6
Zout
FIG. 7-2.
Equivalent circuit for series input and output impedance at
100 MHz.
422 pF 158 pF
11.3
Input
Output
FIG. 7-3.
Equivalent circuit for parallel input and output impedance at
100 MHz.
Class-A Ampliﬁers and Linearity
A class-A ampliﬁer is deﬁned as an ampliﬁer that is biased so that
the output current ﬂows at all times. Thus, the input signal-drive
level to the ampliﬁer is kept small enough to avoid driving the
transistor into cutoff. Another way of stating this is to say that
the conduction angle of the transistor is 360◦—meaning that the
transistor conducts for the full cycle of the input signal.
The class-A ampliﬁer is the most linear of all ampliﬁer types.
Linearity is simply a measure of how closely the output signal
of the ampliﬁer resembles the input signal. A linear ampliﬁer is
one in which the output signal is proportional to the input signal,
as shown in Fig. 7-4. Notice that, in this case, the output signal
level is equal to twice the input signal level, and the transfer
function from input to output is a straight line.
No transistor is perfectly linear, however, and, therefore, the out-
put signal of an ampliﬁer is never an exact replica of the input
signal. There are always spurious components added to a signal
in the form of harmonic generation or intermodulation distor-
tion (IMD). These types of nonlinearities in transistors produce
ampliﬁertransferfunctionsthatnolongerresemblestraightlines.
Instead, a curved characteristic appears, as shown in Fig. 7-5A.
The distortion caused to an input signal of such an ampliﬁer is
shown in Fig. 7-5B. Notice the ﬂat topping of the output signal
that occurs due to the second-harmonic content generated by the
ampliﬁer. This type of distortion is called harmonic distortion
and is expressed by the equation:
Vout = AVin + BV2
in + CV3
in + · · · · · ·
(Eq. 7-1)
Input Signal Level
Output Signal Level
FIG. 7-4.
Transfer characteristic for a linear ampliﬁer.
vout
vout  5vin  2vin
Eout
(A) Transfer characteristic
(B) Resulting waveforms
FIG. 7-5.
Nonlinear ampliﬁer characteristics.
The second term of Equation 7-1 is known as the second har-
monic or second-order distortion. The third term is called the
third harmonic or third-order distortion. Of course, a perfectly
linear ampliﬁer will produce no second, third, or higher order
products to distort the signal.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Transistor Biasing
NoticeinFig. 7-5, wheretheampliﬁer’stransferfunctionisgiven
as Vout = 5Vin + 2V2
in, that the second-order distortion compo-
nent increases as the square of the input signal. Thus, with
increasing input-signal levels, the second-order component will
increase much faster than the fundamental component in the
output signal. Eventually, the second-order content in the output
signal will equal the amplitude of the fundamental. This effect
is shown graphically in Fig. 7-6. The point at which the second-
order and ﬁrst-order content of the output signal are equal is
called the second-order intercept point. A similar graph may be
drawn for an ampliﬁer which exhibits a third-order distortion
characteristic. In this case, the third-order term is plotted along
with the fundamental gain term of the ampliﬁer. In this manner,
the third-order intercept may be determined. The second- and
third-order intercept of an ampliﬁer are often used as ﬁgures of
merit. The higher the intercept point, the better the ampliﬁer is
at amplifying large signals.
12.5 V
First Order
Vout
2.5 V
Second Order
FIG. 7-6.
Second-order intercept point.
When two or more signals are input to an ampliﬁer simulta-
neously, the second-, third-, and higher-order intermodulation
components are caused by the sum and difference products of
each of the fundamental input signals and their associated har-
monics. For example, when two perfect sinusoidal signals, at
frequencies f1 and f2, are input to any nonlinear ampliﬁer, the
following output components will result:
fundamental: f1, f2
second order: 2f1, 2f2, f1 + f2, f1 −f2
third order: 3f1, 3f2, 2f1 ± f2, 2f2 ± f1 + higher order terms
Under normal circuit operation, the second-, third-, and higher-
order terms are usually at a much smaller signal level than the
fundamental component and, in the time domain, this is seen as
distortion. Note that, if f1 and f2 are very close in frequency, the
2f1 −f2 and 2f2 −f1 terms fall very close to the two fundamental
terms. Third-order distortion products are, therefore, much more
difﬁcult to eliminate through ﬁltering once they are generated
within an ampliﬁer.
The bias requirements for a class-A power ampliﬁer are the same
as those for the small-signal ampliﬁers presented in Chapter 6.
In fact, the distinction between a class-A power ampliﬁer and its
small-signal counterpart is a hazy one at best. For all practical
purposes, they are equivalent except for input and output signal
levels.
Class-B Power Ampliﬁers
A class-B ampliﬁer is one in which the conduction angle for the
transistor is approximately 180◦. Thus, the transistor conducts
only half the time—either on the positive or negative half cycle of
the input signal. Again, it is the DC bias applied to the transistor
that determines the class-B operation.
Class-B ampliﬁers are more efﬁcient than class-A ampliﬁers
(70% vs. less than 50%). However, they are much less linear.
Therefore, a typical class-B ampliﬁer will produce quite a bit
of harmonic distortion that must be ﬁltered from the ampliﬁed
signal.
Probably the most common conﬁguration of a class-B ampliﬁer
is the push-pull arrangement shown in Fig. 7-7. In this conﬁgu-
ration, transistor Q1 conducts during the positive half cycles of
the input signal while transistor Q2 conducts during the negative
half cycles. In this manner, the entire input signal is reproduced
at the secondary of transformer T2. Thus, neither device by itself
produces an ampliﬁed replica of the input signal. Instead, the
signal is actually split in half. Each half is then ampliﬁed and
reassembled at the output.
Input
Filter
Output
FIG. 7-7.
Push-pull class-B ampliﬁer.
Of course, a single transistor may be used in a class-B conﬁg-
uration. The only requirement is that a resonant circuit must
be placed in the output network of the transistor in order to
reproduce the “other” half of the input signal.
There are several methods of biasing a transistor for class-B oper-
ation. One of the most widely used methods is shown in Fig. 7-8.
This method simply establishes a base voltage of 0.7V on the
transistor, using an external silicon diode. Often, this diode is
mounted on the transistor itself to help prevent thermal runaway,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
FIG. 7-8.
Simple diode bias for class-B operation.
Bias Network
Amplifier
FIG. 7-9.
Emitter-follower bias for class-B operation.
Amplifier
0.5R
FIG. 7-10.
Operational ampliﬁer bias for class-B operation.
which is often a problem with incorrectly biased power ampli-
ﬁers. Diode CR1 is usually of the heavy-duty variety because the
value of resistor R is usually chosen so that the current through
CR1 is rather high. This ensures that the bias to the transistor is
stable. An alternative bias network is shown in Fig. 7-9. Here,
two silicon diodes are used to forward bias an emitter-follower,
which is used as a current ampliﬁer. The voltage at the emitter
of Q1 and, hence, at the base of Q2, is still 0.7V due to the VBE
drop across transistor Q1. The RF choke and capacitor shown in
both Figs. 7-8 and 7-9 are there only to prevent the ﬂow of RF
into the bias network.
Still another bias arrangement for class-B operation is shown
in Fig. 7-10. Here the bias voltage is made variable so that an
optimum solution may be found for best IMD performance. Care
must be taken in all three bias arrangements to ensure that the
RFC is a low-Q choke for optimum operation.
rbb
FIG. 7-11.
Class-C self bias.
Bypass
Coupling
Signal 
Input
FIG. 7-12.
Circuit for class-C self bias.
Class-C Power Ampliﬁers
A class-C ampliﬁer is one in which the conduction angle for
the transistor is signiﬁcantly less than 180◦. The transistor is
biased such that under steady-state conditions no collector cur-
rent ﬂows. The transistor idles at cutoff. Linearity of the class-C
ampliﬁer is the poorest of the classes of ampliﬁers. Its efﬁciency
can approach 85%, however, which is much better than either
the class-B or the class-A ampliﬁer.
In order to bias a transistor for class-C operation, it is necessary
to reverse bias the base-emitter junction. External biasing is
usually not needed, however, because it is possible to force the
transistor to provide its own bias. This is shown in Fig. 7-11. If
the base of the transistor is returned to ground through an RF
choke (RFC), the base current ﬂowing through the internal base-
spreading resistance (rbb′) tends to reverse bias the base-emitter
junction. This is exactly the effect you would like to achieve.
Of course, it is possible to provide an external DC voltage to
reverse bias the junction, but why bother with the extra time
and expense if the transistor will provide everything you need?
Fig. 7-12 shows a typical class-C ampliﬁer bias arrangement.
RF SEMICONDUCTOR DEVICES
The most popular semiconductor materials used in the manu-
facture of RF components—especially power ampliﬁers—are
silicon (Si) and gallium arsenide (GaAs). Silicon devices are
typically much cheaper to manufacture than gallium arsenide
compounds. Unfortunately, silicon-based RF devices usually
don’t work as well as GaAs for most high-frequency or for
high-power applications. Two exceptions include silicon-based
lateral double-diffused MOSFET (LDMOS), a version of power

--- PAGE BREAK ---

RF Semiconductor Devices
MOSFETs, which are used as high-powered ampliﬁers (100W
and up) in wireless base station applications. Silicon germanium
is another silicon-based device that can exceed the performance
of GaAs devices, though only in low-power, high-frequency
applications, such as in the front-end design of mobile phones
(see Figure 7-13). SiGe power ampliﬁers provide better linear
performance and better power efﬁciency over GaAs. Better efﬁ-
ciency, combined with the lower cost of silicon manufacturing,
has made SiGe more popular in recent years.
1,000
1010
1011
1012
GaAs
SiGe
FIG. 7-13.
RF Power (W) vs. Frequency (Hz) for RF Power Semiconductors.
In addition to silicon germanium (SiGe), several relatively
newer semiconductor compounds are gaining acceptance by RF
engineers (see Table 7-1). The ﬁrst is indium phosphide (InP),
which provides exceptional low noise performance at very high
frequencies, especially in the millimeter wave range (>40 GHz).
Also, InP power ampliﬁers work well at higher frequencies,
though are more expensive to make than SiGe.
Semiconductor
Applications
Silicon (Si)
VLSI, Power ampliﬁers
Gallium Arsenide (GaAs)
RF, Microwave, MM-Wave
Silicon Germanium
Mixed signal, DSP, RF, microwave,
MM-Wave
RF and microwave power ampliﬁers
TABLE 7-1.
Newer Semiconductor Compounds.
Gallium Nitride (GaN) compounds hold great promise for high
frequency, high power ampliﬁers (100W and up) for wire-
less transmitters. When combined with RF receivers in mobile
phones, GaN ampliﬁers could enable the direct assessing of com-
munication satellites. The advantages of GaN devices is its high
powerdensity, whichismanytimesthatofGaAsorInP.Themain
disadvantageofGaN—aswithallgallium-basedcompounds—is
one of high manufacturing expense.
Monolithic Microwave Integrated Circuits (MMIC)
An integrated circuit (IC) results when you add more than one
device to a semiconductor substrate—for example, transistors,
diodes and other electronic components. If the device operates at
microwave frequencies (1 GHz to 300 GHz) and performs such
functions as microwave mixing, power and low noise ampli-
ﬁcation, and switching, then the device is called a monolithic
microwave IC, or MMIC (pronounced mimic). MMICs are most
often made from GaAs, InP or SiGe (see Figure 7-14).
FIG. 7-14.
GaAs MMICs are used in defense, space, and selected
commercial markets. (Courtesy of M/A COM)
Like other mass-produced IC devices, MMICs enjoy the beneﬁt
of low cost in high volume and small chip size (from around
1 mm2 to 10 mm2). The main disadvantage of a MMIC is that
they can have worse performance on certain parameters than the
same devices made out of separate components. For example, if
low noise is a critical performance requirement in a microwave
low noise ampliﬁer, then it may be best to use a discrete com-
ponent ampliﬁer or build one out of transistors, rather than use
a multifunction MMIC. This follows from the fact that, since
MMICs are integrated into a single semiconductor device, the
separate parts of a MMIC cannot be easily tuned as with dis-
crete components distributed on a PCB. Once the MMIC circuit
has been designed, its performance characteristics are set. The
design of integrated circuits using automated software tools is
covered in Chapter 9.
Filters and MMICs
Technologies currently used to fabricate front-end RF and IF
ﬁlters are diverse, although the general trend for all design
approaches is to produce the smallest possible ﬁlter with the
highest performance and power-handling capability.
microwave ﬁlters have been constructed with many materials
and structures, including slabline, combline, and waveguide ﬁl-
ters, in addition to ﬁlters based on different types of resonators,
such as ceramic resonators, crystal resonators, dielectric resonat-
ors, ﬁlm-bulk-acoustic resonators (FBARs), surface-acoustic-
wave (SAW) resonators, and even the exotic yttrium-iron-garnet
(YIG) resonators.
Monolithic IC ﬁlters fabricated on a chip with other semiconduc-
tor devices borrow from the traditional use of passive inductors
(Ls) and capacitors (Cs) to form the resonant circuits at the basis
of an RF/microwave ﬁlter. Because the values of on-chip Ls

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
and Cs are limited, and the fact that the size of these passive ele-
ments is determined by the wavelength or center frequency of the
ﬁlter, the performance of IC-based ﬁlters is extremely limited,
typically prompting designers to specify FBAR, SAW, or other
types of ﬁlters in RF front ends. Similarly, active monolithic
ﬁlters based on operational ampliﬁers (op-amps) that combine
resistor (R) and capacitor (C) elements can achieve high rejection
for typically IF signals, although they are limited in frequency
range for other RF front-end applications.
POWER AMPLIFIER DESIGN
At the beginning of this chapter, you learned that the important
design information for RF power transistors is presented in the
form of large-signal impedance parameters. The formulas pre-
sented in Chapter 6 for small-signal transistor design, using Y
and S parameters, are no longer valid. Instead, the designer must
model with the help of the data sheet, deciding what the input and
output impedance of the transistor looks like at the frequency of
interest. With this information in hand, the designer needs only
to match the input and output impedance of the device to the
source and load, respectively. These two steps require only that
the designer read the input and output impedances off of the
data sheet, and then apply the principles of Chapter 4 to com-
plete the matching network. Care must be taken to ensure that
the information extracted from the data sheet is of the proper
format–series or shunt information.
Often, instead of supplying complete output information for a
transistor in the form of a series or shunt resistance and capac-
itance output, manufacturers will supply output capacitance
information only. This is because the optimum load resistance
for the transistor is easily calculated using a very simple formula,
as we shall soon see.
Optimum Collector Load Resistance
In the absence of collector output resistance information on the
data sheet, it becomes necessary for the designer to make a very
simple calculation to determine the optimum load resistance for
the transistor (Example 7-1). This value of load resistance is
dependent upon the output power level required and is given by:
RL = (VCC −Vsat)2
(Eq. 7-2)
where
VCC = the supply voltage,
Vsat = the saturation voltage of the transistor,
P = the output power level required.
Note that Equation 7-2 provides you with a value of load resis-
tance only. It does not indicate anything about the reactive
portion of the load. On the data sheet, however, the manufacturer
typically provides values of shunt output capacitance versus fre-
quency for the transistor. The designer’s job is to provide a load
for the transistor which absorbs this stray or parasitic capacitance
EXAMPLE 7-1
What value of load resistance is required to obtain 2.0 W
of RF output from a transistor if the supply voltage is 12 V
and the saturation voltage of the transistor is 2 V?
Solution
Using Equation 7-2, we have
RL = (12 −2)2
2(2)
= 25 ohms
so that the transistor may be matched to its load (see Chapter 4).
Example 7-2 may illustrate this point.
Keep in mind that if the output resistance information had not
been provided in the data sheet, it would have been a simple
matter to calculate the required RL using Equation 7-2. Once this
calculation is made, the output matching network is designed in
the same manner as was done in Example 7-2. The 50-ohm load
is simply transformed into the impedances that the transistor
would like to see for the speciﬁed power output.
Driver Ampliﬁers and Interstage Matching
Often it is required that power gain be distributed throughout sev-
eral ampliﬁer stages in order to produce a speciﬁed output power
into a load. This is especially true in transmitter applications that
require a substantial amount of power into an antenna.
The typical procedure for such a design involves ﬁnding, ﬁrst, an
output transistor that will handle the required output power and,
then, designing driver ampliﬁers that will provide the necessary
drive power to the ﬁnal transistor. This type of gain distribution
is shown in Fig. 7-19. Note that the required output-power level
from the ﬁnal ampliﬁer is 15W. A ﬁnal transistor was chosen
which will handle the required output power and which will
provide a gain of 10 dB. The required drive level to the stage is,
therefore, 1.5W, and is supplied by a transistor with a gain of
15 dB. The signal source must, therefore, supply the driver with
a signal level of 47 mW, which is within the capabilities of most
oscillators.
Let’s examine the interstage match between StageA and Stage B
in a little more detail. Often, in dealing with power ampliﬁers, it
is unclear whether or not a true impedance match occurs between
the power ampliﬁer and its load. A true impedance match for an
ampliﬁer would involve providing a load for the transistor that
is the complex conjugate of its output impedance. In design-
ing power ampliﬁers, however, we speak of providing a load
resistance (Equation 7-2) for the transistor in order to extract a
speciﬁed power gain from the stage. This is simply a matter of
semantics and, from a circuit-design viewpoint, it doesn’t really
matter how you look at it. Fig. 7-20 illustrates this point. Sup-
pose the transistor of Stage B has an input impedance as shown
(Zin = 1.7 −j2.7 ohms). Also, suppose that Stage A, in order to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Power Ampliﬁer Design
EXAMPLE 7-2
Using the data sheet of Fig. 7-1, design a class-C power
ampliﬁer that will deliver 15 W between a 50-ohm source and
load at 100 MHz.
Solution
The data sheet for the MRF233 transistor provides input and
output impedance information for the transistor in both series
and parallel form. The designer is, therefore, left with a choice
as to which he prefers. The input-matching design may
proceed as in the following method.
Z Matching
j2.7 Transistor
FIG. 7-15.
Transistor input impedance for Example 7-2.
The input impedance of the transistor appears as shown in the
diagram of Fig. 7-15. This information was taken from Figure 5
of the data sheet. Note that the object of the input-matching
network is to transform the input impedance of the transistor
up to 50 ohms to provide an optimum load for the source.
Using the techniques of Chapter 4, ﬁrst resonate the series
capacitance with an equal and opposite series inductance of
+j2.7 ohms. Then, match the remaining 1.7-ohm resistive
load to the source as follows. Using Equation 4-1 through 4-3,
for the L-network:
Qs = Qp =
−1 =
1.7 −1 = 5.33
(Eq. 4-1)
Xs = RsQs = (1.7)(5.33) = 9.06 ohms
(Eq. 4-2)
Xp = Rp
5.33 = 9.38 ohms
(Eq. 4-3)
12.08 ohms
50 ohms
j2.7 ohms
j2.7
j9.38
j9.38 ohms
1.7 ohms
FIG. 7-16.
Input matching network for Example 7-2.
This matching network is shown in Fig. 7-16. Note that it is
convenient to use a shunt-C series-L matching network in
order to easily absorb the +j2.7-ohm inductor that was
needed earlier. Thus, the two inductors may be combined into
a single component in the actual design.
Since complete output-impedance information is provided for
the transistor (Figure 5 of the data sheet), it is only necessary
to match this output impedance to the 50-ohm load.
Proceeding as before, ﬁrst resonate the −j5.6-ohm series
capacitance with an inductor of equal value. Then, match the
remaining 5-ohm resistive portion of the transistor output to
the load as follows:
Qs = Qp =
−1 =
5 −1 = 3
Xs = QsRs = (3)(5) = 15 ohms
Xp = Rp
= 50
3 = 16.7 ohms
The output network is shown in Fig. 7-17. Note that it is again
convenient to use the series-L shunt-C arrangement so that
we may absorb the +j5.6-ohm inductor used previously.
A practical circuit for this design might appear as shown in
Fig. 7-18.
20.6 ohms
50 ohms
j5.6
j15
j16.7 ohms
j5.6 ohms
5 ohms
FIG. 7-17.
Output matching network for Example 7-2.
12.5 V
0.01mF
310 
50 
50 
0.1 mF
0.1 mF
170 pF
19 nH
95.3 pF
32.7 nH
FIG. 7-18.
Final circuit realization for Example 7-2.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
Oscillator
Stage A
Stage B
10 dB
15 dB
47 mW
1.5 W
15 W
FIG. 7-19.
System drive requirements for a 15-watt transmitter.
Stage A
15 pF
25 ohms
Z Match
Stage B
j2.7
FIG. 7-20.
Requirement for an interstage impedance-matching network.
supply the required 1.5W of RF drive, requires a load resistance
of 25 ohms. The role of the impedance-matching network, then,
is to transform the low-input impedance of Stage B up to the
25-ohm level required by StageA. In addition, the matching net-
work must absorb or resonate out the 15-pF output capacitance
of Stage A.
MATCHING TO COAXIAL FEEDLINES
The T and Pi networks studied in Chapter 4 are excellent candi-
dates for use in matching coaxial feedlines to power ampliﬁers.
Often such a network will serve a dual purpose, especially
when conﬁgured as a low-pass ﬁlter, in providing harmonic
suppression for a transmitter.
Fig. 7-21 is a diagram of a coaxial feed to an antenna at the
antenna’s resonant frequency. Resistance Ra is the antenna’s
radiation resistance.A quarter-wavelength vertical antenna oper-
ating against a very good ground plane has a radiation resistance
of about 35 ohms while a half-wave center-fed dipole has a radi-
ation resistance of about 70 ohms, at its resonant frequency.
This is simply the resistance that the coaxial cable sees at the
antenna terminals. Above and below the resonant frequency of
the antenna, its radiation resistance begins to show a reactive
component. This is illustrated in Fig. 7-22. Above resonance
(Fig. 7-22A), the antenna looks inductive, and below resonance
(Fig. 7-22B), the antenna looks capacitive.
Transmitter 
Final
Zo  50 ohms
Antenna
FIG. 7-21.
Antenna radiation resistance at resonance.
Zin?
Zin?
jXa
jXa
(A) Above resonance
(B) Below resonance
FIG. 7-22.
Radiation resistance of an antenna.
At the transmitter end of the coaxial feedline, the impedance
that the output transistor actually sees is not only a function
of the antenna’s radiation resistance, but also a function of the
length of the coaxial feedline. The impedance along the line
varies sinusoidally as you move away from the antenna. Thus,
at a distance of one half-wavelength back from the antenna, the
impedance looking into the coax would appear to be equal to
the antenna’s radiation resistance. At other distances removed
from the antenna, however, the coax would appear to have a
much different input impedance, depending upon the degree of
mismatch between the antenna and the feedline. Therefore, it
is extremely difﬁcult to estimate the actual input impedance of
any transmission line unless the line is terminated in its charac-
teristic impedance. That is to say, a 50-ohm coaxial cable will
not look like 50 ohms at its input unless there is a 50-ohm load
at the other end of the cable. Since this is hardly ever the case
when driving practical antenna systems, it is not very practical
to design a matching network unless the network is tunable. In
addition, many antenna installations operate over quite a range of
frequencies. Since the radiation resistance of the antenna varies
with frequency, the input impedance of the coaxial cable must
also vary, and the matching network must be able to compensate
for these variations.
Fig. 7-23 indicates two possible methods of providing a tun-
able impedance-matching network for a transmission line. The
T network of Fig. 7-23A uses both tapped inductors and a tun-
able capacitor. The Pi network of Fig. 7-23B uses only tunable
capacitors. Note that, in both cases, the low-pass conﬁguration
is used to aid in suppressing harmonics of the transmitted signal.
Coax to 
Transmitter
Coax to 
Transmitter
Coax to 
Antenna
Coax to 
Antenna
(A) T network
(B) Pi network
FIG. 7-23.
Variable coaxial feedline matching networks.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Broadband Transformers
The circuits of Fig. 7-23 are designed in the same manner as
those shown in Chapter 4. Of course, if you had a requirement
that the harmonics of the transmitted signal were required to be at
a certain level below the fundamental, say 50 dB, then the ﬁlter-
design approach used in Chapter 3 might be the best approach
to take.
AUTOMATIC SHUTDOWN CIRCUITRY
Since power ampliﬁers are designed to supply a considerable
amount of power to an antenna system, an impedance mismatch
presented to the ampliﬁer could cause very severe problems. As
we learned in Chapter 4, an impedance mismatch between a
source and its load causes reﬂection of some of the signal inci-
dent upon that load. This reﬂected signal will eventually make
its way back to the source and, in high-power transmitters, can
cause serious side-effects, such as transistor damage in the form
of secondary breakdown. For this reason, many manufacturers
of power ampliﬁers include a VSWR monitoring circuit in the
transmitter, which monitors the standing wave ratio of the out-
put circuit and, in the event that the VSWR becomes excessive,
indicating a severe mismatch, the circuit automatically decreases
the RF drive to the ﬁnal ampliﬁer, thereby reducing the transmit-
ter’s output power. The reduction in output power subsequently
reduces the reﬂected power from the load, thus, protecting the
output transistor. A simpliﬁed diagram of such a system appears
in Fig. 7-24.
Driver Amplifiers
Final 
Amplifier
Magnetic 
Coupling
Reduce stage gain 
with poor SWR 
at antenna
Threshold Set
Peak Detector
FIG. 7-24.
Automatic shutdown circuitry.
BROADBAND TRANSFORMERS
Several types of broadband transformers, which are often used in
power-ampliﬁer design, are illustrated in Fig. 7-25. Fig. 7-25A
is known as a 1:1 balun. It is used mainly to connect a balanced
source to an un-balanced load, or vice versa, and it provides no
impedance-transforming function.
Fig. 7-25B is a 4:1 transformer. That is to say, it will transform
an impedance of 4R down to an impedance of R, or vice versa.
The small dot located next to each winding indicates polarity.
(B) 4:1 transformer
(A) 1:1 balun
(C) 9:1 transformer
FIG. 7-25.
Types of broadband transformers.
A detailed look at Fig. 7-25B will explain how the 4:1 trans-
formation occurs. First, suppose that a voltage (V) has been
impressed across the load resistor and the voltage across the
same voltage must also be impressed across the lower winding
of the transformer since the two are in parallel. The voltage on
the lower winding impresses the same voltage (V) on the upper
winding with the polarity indicated. This is true because each
winding has the same number of turns. The voltage at the input
terminals is, therefore, equal to the sum of the voltage across the
load resistor and the voltage across the upper winding, or 2V.
Suppose now that a current of I/2 is injected at the input termi-
nals of the transformer. This current ﬂowing in the top winding
of the transformer induces a current of I/2 in the bottom wind-
ing in the direction shown. The current in the load resistor is,
therefore, equal to I/2 + I/2 or I. Therefore, if the load resis-
tor is equal to 1 ohm, the resistance seen looking into the input
terminals of the transformer, then, must be:
Resistance = Voltage
Current
= 2V
= 4R

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
A 9:1 transformer is illustrated in Fig. 7-25C. Note that this
transformer is actually made up of two separate transformers,
T1 and T2. A similar analysis may be made of this trans-
former to conﬁrm the 9:1 transformation. Voltages and currents
are included in the diagrams to aid in the analysis process.
Obviously, several transformers may be included in such a con-
ﬁguration to produce other transformation ratios. Fig. 7-26,
for example, includes three separate transformers that are used
to produce a 16:1 impedance transformation.
FIG. 7-26.
A 16:1 broadband transformer.
Power Splitters
A basic power splitter is shown in Fig. 7-27. Ideally, the power
into the primary of the transformer is split evenly between ampli-
ﬁer No. 1 and ampliﬁer No. 2. However, due to input-impedance
variations between the two ampliﬁers, this is rarely the case.
Instead, one ampliﬁer is usually provided with a bit more drive
power than the other. To aid in equalizing the power split, resis-
tor R at the center tap of the secondary is often left out of the
circuit. (Once again, the small dots are used to indicate polarity.)
P1/2
P1/2
Amplifier 1
Amplifier 2
FIG. 7-27.
A power splitter.
Amplifier 1
Amplifier 2
FIG. 7-28.
A power combiner.
Power Combiners
A typical power combiner is shown in Fig. 7-28. Here, the power
output of each ampliﬁer is combined in transformerT1 to provide
an output power of P1 + P2. Power combiners are often used
in power-ampliﬁer designs where it is impractical for a single
stage to produce the necessary output power. In this case, two
ampliﬁers, operating 180◦out-of-phase, will each provide half
the needed output power to the power combiner. The combined
output is, therefore, equal to the power level required.
PRACTICAL WINDING HINTS
Broadband transformers are often called transmission-line trans-
formers because they make use of the transmission-line proper-
ties of the windings. This is done by using biﬁlar- or triﬁlar-type
windings rather than the conventional type of winding.
A conventional transformer usually has two entirely separate
windings. That is, one of the windings is usually wound onto
the core ﬁrst, and then the other winding is wound on top of
the ﬁrst winding. Typically, the larger winding is wound ﬁrst for
convenience. This winding technique is shown in the toroidal
transformer diagram of Fig. 7-29. Note that an impedance trans-
formation occurs between the primary and secondary of the
transformer. The value of the transformation is dependent upon
the turns ratio from the primary to the secondary. Transmission-
line transformers use an entirely different technique for the
windings, as shown in Fig. 7-30. First, the primary and sec-
ondary windings are made by twisting the wires together for a
FIG. 7-29.
A conventional transformer.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Summary
(A) The windings
(B) Turns wound 
around a toriod
(C) Circuit representation
FIG. 7-30.
A biﬁlar-wound broadband transformer.
certain number of turns per inch (Fig. 7-30A). This produces a
certain characteristic impedance for the resulting “transmission
line” in much the same manner that a coaxial cable exhibits a
certain characteristic impedance which is dependent upon the
spacing of its center conductor to its outer conductor. The actual
characteristic impedance of the twisted pair is dependent upon
the number of turns per inch, the shape of the windings, and
the size wire used. For low-impedance lines, tight twists (many
turns per inch) are used while high-impedance lines may not
be twisted at all. Instead, the windings will be placed side-by-
side around the core. For optimum operation, the characteristic
impedance of the winding should be equal to:
Zo =
RsRL
(Eq. 7-3)
where
Rs = the primary impedance,
RL = the secondary impedance.
Typically, Zo must be found experimentally.
The transformer of Fig. 7-30 is called a biﬂar-wound transformer
because it uses two conductors in the twisted-winding arrange-
ment. A triﬁlar transformer is one that uses three conductors,
and so on.
As shown, Fig. 7-30 is simply a 1:1 broadband transformer. If
connected as shown in Fig. 7-25B, however, this arrangement
could be used to produce a 4:1 broadband transformer. This may
be done by simply connecting lines 2 and 3 together and using
that junction as your output port. Line 4 is connected to ground
and line 1 is then the input port.
Often, instead of using a twisted pair, the designer may instead
use coaxial cable for the windings. The center conductor and
outer conductor of the coax, then, take the place of each con-
ductor in the twisted pair. This is done primarily because each
type of coax has a very well-deﬁned and consistent characteris-
tic impedance and this eliminates the experimentation involved
in deﬁning the characteristic impedance of the twisted pair. Of
course, the use of standard coaxial cable does not allow for
triﬁlar-wound transformers. Typically, broadband transformers
are wound on low-Q, high-permeability, ferrite toroidal cores
(see Chapter 1). The high permeability is needed at the low end
of the frequency spectrum where, for a given inductance, fewer
turns would be needed.
SUMMARY
The power-ampliﬁer design process is not as well deﬁned as that
of the small-signal ampliﬁer. Thus, considerable experimenta-
tion may be necessary in order to optimize a design. StandardY
and S parameters are not used in power-ampliﬁer design. Instead,
large-signal impedance parameters are typically provided by
the transistor manufacturers to aid in the design process. Fol-
lowing the impedance-matching procedures outlined in Chapter
4, the designer must match the source to the transistor’s input
impedance, and transform the load impedance to a value that is
dependent upon the required output-power level from the stage.
The source must be capable of providing the required RF drive
level, or the calculated RF power output from the stage will never
be achieved.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

This page intentionally left blank 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C H A P T E R 8
RF FRONT-END
Design
hroughout most of this book, we have studied the com-
ponents that make up RF circuits. Now we put all these
pieces together to form one of the most critical subsys-
tems in any communication system—namely, the RF
front end. We’ll start by showing where the RF front end
ﬁts in today’s modern applications, and then decompose or “tear
down” this subsystem into its basic components and functions,
many of which have already been covered in earlier chapters.
This approach will also provide a logical way to introduce key
receivertypesandassociatedperformancespeciﬁcations, suchas
signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), receiver sensitivity, and selectivity.
The RF front end is part of an overall radio receiver-transmitter or
transceiver system. It is generally deﬁned as everything between
the antenna and the digital baseband system. For a receiver,
this “between” area includes all the ﬁlters, low-noise ampliﬁers
(LNAs), and down-conversion mixer(s) needed to process the
modulatedsignalsreceivedattheantennaintosignalssuitablefor
input into the baseband analog-to-digital converter (ADC). For
this reason, the RF front end is often called the analog-to-digital
or RF-to-baseband portion of a receiver.
Radios work by receiving RF waves containing previously mod-
ulated information sent by a RF transmitter. The receiver is
basically a low noise ampliﬁer that down converts the incom-
ing signal. Hence, sensitivity and selectivity are the primary
concerns in receiver design.
Conversely, a transmitter is an up converts an outgoing sig-
nal prior to passage through a high power ampliﬁer. In this
case, non-linearity of the ampliﬁer is a primary concern. Yet,
even with these differences, the design of the receiver front end
and transmitter back end share many common elements—like
local oscillators. In this chapter, we’ll concentrate our efforts on
understanding the receiver side.
Thanks to advances in the design and manufacture of inte-
grated circuits (ICs), some of the traditional analog IF signal-
processing tasks can be handled digitally. These traditional
analog tasks, like ﬁltering and up-down conversion, can now
be handled by means of digital ﬁlters and digital signal
processors (DSPs). Texas Instruments have coined the term
digital radio processors for this type of circuit. This migration
of analog into digital circuits means that the choice of what
front-end functions are implemented by analog and digital means
generally depends on such factors as required performance,
cost, size, and power consumption. Because of the mix of
analog and digital technologies, RF front end chips using mixed-
signal technologies may also be referred to as RF-to-digital or
RF-to-baseband (RF/D) chips.
Why is the front end so important? It turns out that this is
arguably the most critical part of the whole receiver. Trade-offs
in overall system performance, power consumption, and size are
determined between the receiver front end and the ADCs in the
baseband (middle end). In more detail, the analog front end sets
the stage for what digital bit-error-rate (BER) performance is
possible at ﬁnal bit detection. It is here that the receiver can,
within limits, be designed for the best potential SNR.
HIGHER LEVELS OF INTEGRATION
Look inside any modern mobile phone, multimedia device, or
home-entertainment control system that relies on the reception
and/or transmission of wireless signals and you’ll ﬁnd an RF
front end. In the RIM Blackberry PDA, for example, the com-
munication system consists of both a transceiver chip and RF
front-end module (see Fig. 8-1). The front-end module incorpo-
ratesseveralintegratedcircuits(ICs)thatmaybebasedonwidely
different semiconductor processes, such as conventional silicon
CMOS and advanced silicon germanium (SiGe) technologies.
Functionally, such multichip modules provide most if not all of
the analog signal processing—ﬁltering, detection, ampliﬁcation
and demodulation via a mixer. (The term “system-in-package”
or SIP is a synonym for multichip module or MCM.)
Multichip front-end modules demonstrate an important trend
in RF receiver design, namely, ever-increasing levels of sys-
tem integration required to squeeze more functionality into
a single chip. The reasons for this trend—especially in con-
sumer electronics—come from the need for lower costs, lower
power consumption (especially in mobile and portable prod-
ucts), and smaller product size. Still, regardless of the level
of integration, the basic RF architecture remains unchanged:
signal ﬁltering, detection, ampliﬁcation and demodulation.
More speciﬁcally, a modulated RF carrier signal couples
with an antenna designed for a speciﬁc band of frequencies.
The antenna passes the modulated signals along to the RF

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
FIG. 8-1.
Tear down of modern mobile device reveals several RF front-end chips. (Courtesy of iSuppli)
receiver’s front end. After much conditioning in the front-end
circuitry, the modulation or information portion of the signal—
now in the form of an analog baseband signal—is ready for
analog-to-digital conversion into the digital world. Once in the
digital realm, the information can be extracted from the dig-
itized carrier waveforms and made available as audio, video,
or data.
Before the advent of such tightly integrated modules, each
functional block of the RF front end was a separate compo-
nent, designed separately. This means that there were separate
components for the RF ﬁlter, detector, mixer-demodulator,
and ampliﬁer. More importantly, this meant that all of these
physically independent blocks had to be connected together.
To prevent signal attenuation and distortion and to minimize
signal reﬂections due to impedance differences between func-
tion blocks, components were standardized for a characteristic
impedance of 50 ohms, which was also the impedance of
high-frequency test equipment. The 50-ohm coaxial cable [1]
interface was a trade-off that minimized signal attenuation while
maximizing power transfer—signal energy—between the inde-
pendently designed RF ﬁlter, LNA, and mixer. Before higher
levels of functional integration and thus lower costs could be
achieved, it was necessary to design and manufacture these RF
functional blocks using standard semiconductor processes, such
as silicon CMOS IC processes.
Unfortunately, one of the drawbacks of CMOS technology can be the
difﬁculty in achieving a 50-ohm input impedance. Still, it is only nec-
essary to have the 50-ohm matched input and output impedances when
the connection lines between the sub-circuits is long compared to the
wavelength of the carrier wave. For ICs and MCMs at GHz frequen-
cies, connections lines are short, so 50-ohm between sub-circuits isn’t
a problem. It is necessary to somehow get to 50 ohms to connect to the
(longer) printed circuit board traces.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Basic Receiver Architectures
This is but one example of the changes that have taken place
with modern integrated front ends. We will not cover all the
changes here. Instead, we’ll focus on the important design
parameters that can affect the design of an RF front end,
including the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), receiver sensitiv-
ity, receiver and channel ﬁlter selectivity, and even the bit
resolution of the ADC (covered later). This high-level descrip-
tion of the RF front end reveals not only the basic func-
tioning but also the potential system trade-offs that must be
considered.
As mentioned earlier, the basic stages of an RF front end include
an antenna, ﬁlter, detector-demodulator, and ampliﬁer. Each of
these signal-conditioning stages contains unique circuit com-
ponents, many of which have already been covered in earlier
portions of this book. None of these components work in iso-
lation and the performance of one component may well affect
the performance of another. This is why we’ll look at each of
these key component function blocks in the context of several
different radio architectures: detector, direct-conversion, and
superheterodyne receiver conﬁgurations.
BASIC RECEIVER ARCHITECTURES
The fundamental operation of an RF front end is fairly straight-
forward: it detects and processes radio waves that have been
transmitted with a speciﬁc known frequency or range of fre-
quencies and known modulation format. The modulation carries
the information of interest, be it voice, audio, data, or video.
The receiver must be tuned to resonate with the transmitted fre-
quency or frequencies in order to detect them. Those received
signals are then ﬁltered from all surrounding signals and noise
and ampliﬁed prior to a process known as demodulation, which
removes the desired information from the radio waves that
carried it.
These three steps—ﬁltering, ampliﬁcation and demodulation—
detail the overall process. But actual implementation of this
process (i.e., designing the physical RF receiver printed-circuit
board (PCB)) depends upon the type, complexity, and quantity
of the data being transmitted. For example, designing an RF
front end to handle a simple amplitude-modulated (AM) signal
requires far less effort and hardware (and even software) than
building an RF front end for the latest third-generation (3G)
mobile telecommunications handset.
Because of the enhanced performance of analog components
due to IC process improvements and decreasing costs of more
powerful digital-signal-processing (DSP) hardware and software
functions, the ways that different RF front-end architectures are
realized has changed over the years. Still, the basic requirements
for an RF front end, such as the frequency range and type of
carrier to be received, the RF link budget, and the power, per-
formance, and size restrictions of the front-end design, remain
relatively the same in spite of the differences in radio architec-
tures. Let’s start by looking at the simplest of radio architectures
or implementations.
AM Detector Receivers
One of the basic RF receiver architectures for detecting a modu-
lated signal is the amplitude modulation (AM) detector receiver
(seeFig.8-2). Thenamecomesfromthefactthatinformationlike
speech and music could be converted into amplitude (voltage)
modulated signals riding on a carrier wave. Such an RF signal
could be de-modulated at the receiving end by means of a simple
diode detector. All that is needed for a basic AM receiver—like
a simple crystal radio—is an antenna, RF ﬁlter, detector, and
(optional) ampliﬁer to boost the recovered information to a level
suitable for a listening device, such as a speaker or headphones.
The antenna, which is capacitive at the low frequencies used for
AM broadcasting, is series matched with an inductor to maxi-
mize current through both, thus maximizing the voltage across
the secondary coil (see Chapter 2). A variable capacitance ﬁlter
may be used to select the designed frequency band (or channel)
and to block any unwanted signals, such as noise. The ﬁltered
signal is then converted to demodulate theAM signal and recover
the information. Fig. 8-3 represents a schematic version of the
block diagram shown in Fig. 8-2.
Detector
Antenna
Output
Bandpass
filter
FIG. 8-2.
Simple amplitude modulation (AM) radio architecture.
.001 uF
capacitor
Coil
(inductor)
Diode
Variable
capacitor
Antenna
Headphones
FIG. 8-3.
Circuit schematic of a simple AM radio.
The heart of the AM architecture is the detector demodulator.
In early crystal radios, the detector was simply a ﬁne metal
wire that contacted a crystal of galena (lead sulﬁde), thus cre-
ating a point contact rectiﬁer or “crystal detector.” In these
early designs, the ﬁne metal contact was often referred to as
a “catwhisker.” Although point-contact diodes are still in use
today in communication receivers and radar, most have been

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
replaced by pn-junction diodes, which are more reliable and
easier to manufacture.
For a simple AM receiver, the detector diode acts as a half-wave
rectiﬁer to convert or rectify a received AC signal to a DC signal
by blocking the negative or positive portion of the waveform (see
Fig. 8-4). A half-wave rectiﬁer clips the input signal by allowing
either the positive or negative half of the AC wave to pass easily
through the rectiﬁer, depending upon the polarity of the rectiﬁer.
A shunt inductor is typically placed in front of the detector to
serve as an RF choke (see Chapter 2). The inductor maintains
the input to the detector diode at DC ground while preserving
a high impedance in parallel with the diode, thus maintaining
the RF performance.
Antenna
AM envelope detector
Rectified signal
FIG. 8-4.
Circuit schematic of a half-wave rectiﬁer.
In a simple detector receiver, the AM carrier wave excites a
resonance in the inductor/tuned capacitor (LC) tank subcir-
cuit. The tank acts like a local oscillator (LO). to the current
through the diode is proportional to the amplitude of the reso-
nance and this gives thebaseband signal (typically analog audio).
The baseband signal may be in either analog or digital format,
depending upon the original format of the information used to
modulate theAM carrier.As we shall see, this process of translat-
ing a signal down or up to the baseband level becomes a critical
technique in most modern radios. The exception is time domain
or pulse position modulation. Interestingly, this scheme dates
back to the earliest (spark gap) radio transmitters. It’s strange
how history repeats itself. Another example is that the earliest
radios were digital (Morse code), than analog was considered
superior (analog voice transmission), now digital is back!
The ﬁnal stage of a typical AM detector system is the ampli-
ﬁer, which is needed to provide adequate drive levels for an
audio listening device, such as a headset or speaker. One of
the disadvantages of the signal diode detector is its poor power
transfer efﬁciency. But to understand this deﬁciency, you must
ﬁrst understand the limitation of the AM design that uses a half-
wave rectiﬁer at the receiver. At transmission from the source,
the AM signal modulation process generates two copies of the
information (voice or music) plus the carrier. For example, con-
sider an AM radio station that broadcasts at a carrier frequency
of 900 kHz. The transmission might be modulated by a 1000-
Hz (1-kHz) signal or tone. The RF front end in an AM radio
receiver will pick up the 900-kHz carrier signal along with the
1-kHz plus and minus modulation around the carrier, at fre-
quencies of 901 and 899 kHz, respectively (see Fig. 8-5). The
modulation frequencies are also known as the upper and lower
Frequency (KHz)
F  Fupper
F  FLower
FIG. 8-5.
Half-wave rectiﬁed AM radio produces upper and lower
sidebands.
sideband frequencies, respectively. But only one of the side-
bands is needed to completely demodulate the received signal.
The other sideband contains duplicate information. Thus, the
disadvantages of AM transmissions are twofold: (1) for a given
information bandwidth, twice that bandwidth is needed to con-
vey the information, and (2) the power used to transmit the
unused sideband is wasted (typically, up to 50% of the total
transmitted power).
Naturally, there are other ways to demodulate detector-based
receiver architectures. We have just covered an approach used in
popularAM receivers. Replacing the diode detector with another
detector type would allow us to detect frequency-modulated
(FM) or phase-modulated (PM) signals, this latter modulation
commonly used in transmitting digital data. For example, many
modern telecommunication receivers rely heavily on phase-
shift keying (PSK), a form of phase (angle) modulation. The
phrase “shift keying” is an older expression (from the Morse
code era) for “digital.”
All detector circuits are limited in their capability to differenti-
ate between adjacent signal bands or channels. This capability
is a measure of the selectivity of the receiver and is a func-
tion of the input RF ﬁlter to screen out unwanted signals and
to pass (select) only the desired signals. As you might have
guess from earlier discussions (see Chapter 2), selectivity is
related to the quality factor or Q of the RF ﬁlter. A high Q
means that the circuit provides sharp ﬁltering and good differen-
tiation between channels—a must for modern communication
systems. Unfortunately, tuning the center carrier frequency of
the ﬁlter across a large bandwidth while maintaining a high dif-
ferentiation between adjacent channels is very difﬁcult at the
higher frequencies found in today’s mobile devices. Selectivity
across a large bandwidth is complicated by a receiver’s sensitiv-
ity requirement, or the need to need to detect very small signals
in the presence of system noise—noise that comes from the earth
(thermal noise), not just the receiver system itself. The sensitivity
of receiving systems is deﬁned as the smallest signal that leads
to an acceptable signal-to-noise ratio (SNR).
Receiver selectivity and sensitivity are key technical perfor-
mance measures (TPMs) and will be covered in more detail in
this chapter.At this point, it is sufﬁcient to note that theAM diode
detector architecture is limited in selectivity and sensitivity.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Basic Receiver Architectures
TRF Receiver
Moving up the scale in complexity, we come to the next evolutionary RF
architecture: the tuned-radio-frequency (TRF) receiver (see Fig. 8-6).
This early design was one of the ﬁrst to use ampliﬁcation techniques
to enhance the quality of the signal reception. A TRF receiver con-
sisted of several RF stages, all simultaneously tuned to the received
frequency before detection and subsequent ampliﬁcation of the audio
signal. Each tuned stage consisted of a bandpass ﬁlter—which need
not be an LC tank ﬁlter but could also be a Surface Acoustic Wave
(SAW) ﬁlter or a dielectric cavity ﬁlter—with an ampliﬁer to boost
the desired signal while reducing unwanted signals such as interfer-
ence. The ﬁnal stage of the design is a combination of a diode rectiﬁer
and audio ampliﬁer, collectively known as a grid-leak detector. In con-
trast to other radio architectures, there is no translation in frequency
of the input signals, and no mixing of these input signals with those
from a tunable LO. The original input signal is demodulated at the
detector stage. On the positive side, this simple architecture does not
generate the image signals that are common to other receiver formats
using frequency mixers, such as superheterodynes (covered later in this
chapter).
Detector
with amp 
High gain
Antenna
Output
Tuned
filters
FIG. 8-6.
Tuned Radio Frequency (TRF) architecture emphasizes multiple
tuned ﬁlters.
The addition of each LC ﬁlter-ampliﬁer stage in a TRF receiver
increases the overall selectivity. On the downside, each such
stage must be individually tuned to the desired frequency since
each stage has to track the previous stage. Not only is this
difﬁcult to do physically, it also means that the received band-
width increases with frequency. For example, if the circuit Q
was 50 at the lower end of the AM band, say 550 kHz, then
the receiver bandwidth would be 500/50 or 11 kHz—a reason-
able value. However at the upper end of the AM spectrum,
say 1650 kHz, the received bandwidth increases to 1650/50 or
33 kHz.
As a result, the selectivity in a TRF receiver is not constant,
since the receiver is more selective at lower frequencies and
less selective at higher frequencies. Such variations in selec-
tivity can cause unwanted oscillations and modes in the tuned
stages. In addition, ampliﬁcation is not constant over the tuning
range. Such shortcomings in the TRF receiver architecture have
led to more widespread adoption of other receiver architectures,
including direct-conversion and superheterodyne receivers, for
many modern wireless applications.
Direct-Conversion Receiver
A way to overcome the need for several individually tuned
RF ﬁlters in the TRF receiver is by directly converting the
original signal to a much lower baseband frequency. In the direct-
conversion receiver (DCR) architecture, frequency translation
is used to change the high input frequency carrying the mod-
ulated information into a lower frequency that still carries the
modulation but which is easier to detect and demodulate. This
frequency translation is achieved by mixing the input RF signal
with a reference signal of identical or near-identical frequency
(see Fig. 8-7). The nonlinear mixing of the two signals results in
a baseband signal prior to the detection or demodulating stage
of the front-end receiver.
Mixer
Low-pass
filter
Antenna
filter
Output to
ADC (baseband)
Local
Oscillator (LO)
FIG. 8-7.
Direct Conversion Receiver (DCR) architecture.
The reference signal is generated by a local oscillator (LO).
When an input RF signal is combined in a nonlinear device,
such as a diode or ﬁeld-effect-transistor (FET) mixer, with an
LO signal, the result is an intermediate-frequency (IF) sig-
nal that is the sum or difference of the RF and LO signals.
When the LO signal is chosen to be the same as the RF input
signal, the receiver is said to have a homodyne (or “same fre-
quency”) architecture and is also known as a zero-IF receiver.
Conversely, if the reference signal is different from the fre-
quency to be detected, then it’s called a heterodyne (or “different
frequency”) receiver. The terms superheterodyne and hetero-
dyne are synonyms (“super” means “higher” or “above” not
“better”).
In either homodyne or heterodyne approaches, new frequen-
cies are generated by mixing two or more signals in a nonlinear
device, such as a transistor or diode mixer. The mixing of two
carefully chosen frequencies results in the creation of two new
frequencies, one being the sum of the two mixed frequencies and
the other being the difference between the two mixed signals.
The lower frequency is called the beat frequency, in reference
to the audio “beat” that can be produced by two signals close in
frequency when the mixing product is an actual audio-frequency
(AF) tone.
For example, if a frequency of 2000 Hz and another of 2100 Hz
were beat together, then an audible beat frequency of 100 Hz
would be produced. The end result is a frequency shifting from
a higher frequency to lower—and in the case of RF receivers—
baseband frequency.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
Direct conversion or homodyne (zero-IF) receivers use an LO
synchronized to the exact frequency of the carrier in order to
directly translate the input signals to baseband frequencies. In
theory, this simple approach eliminates the need for multiple
frequency downconversion stages along with their associated
ﬁlters, frequency mixers, and LOs. This means that a ﬁxed RF
ﬁlter can be used after the antenna, instead of multiple tuned
RF ﬁlters as in the TRF receiver. The ﬁxed RF ﬁlter can thus be
designed to have a higher Q.
In direct-conversion design, the desired signal is obtained by
tuning the local oscillator to the desired signal frequency. The
remaining unwanted frequencies that appear after downconver-
sion stay at the higher frequency bands and can be removed by
a lowpass ﬁlter placed after the mixer stage.
If the incoming signal is digitally encoded, then the RF receiver
uses digital ﬁlters within a DSP to perform the demodulation.
Two mixers are needed to retain both the amplitude and phase
of the original modulated signal: one for the in-phase (I) and
another for a quadrature (Q) baseband output. Quadrature down-
conversion is needed since two sidebands generally form around
any RF carrier frequency. As we have already seen, these side-
bands are at different frequencies. Thus, using a single mixer,
for a digitally encoded signal, would result in the loss of one of
the sidebands. This is why an I/Q demodulator is typically used
for demodulating the information contained in the I and Q signal
components.
Unfortunately, many direct-conversion receivers are susceptible
to spurious LO leakage, when LO energy is coupled to the I/Q
demodulator by means of the system antenna or via another path.
Any LO leakage can mix with the main LO signal to generate a
DC offset, possibly imposing potentially large DC offset errors
on the frequency-translated baseband signals. Through careful
design, LO leakage in a direct-conversion receiver can be min-
imized by maintaining high isolation between the mixer’s LO
and RF ports.
Perhaps the biggest limitation of direct-conversion receivers is
their susceptibility to various noise sources at DC, which creates
a DC offset. The sources of unwanted signals typically are the
impedance mismatches between the ampliﬁer and mixer.
As noted earlier in this chapter, improvements in IC inte-
gration via better control of the semiconductor manufacturing
process have mitigated many of the mismatch-related DC offset
problems.
Still another way to solve DC offset problems is to downcon-
vert to a center frequency near, but not at, zero. Near-zero IF
receivers do just that, by downconverting to an intermediate
frequency (IF) which preserves the modulation of the RF sig-
nal by keeping it above the noise ﬂoor and away from other
unwanted signals. Unfortunately, this approach creates a new
problem, namely that the image frequency and the baseband
beat signals that arise from inherent signal distortion, can both
fall within the intermediate band. The image frequencies, to be
covered later, can be larger than the desired signal frequency,
thus causing resolution challenges for the analog-to-digital
converter.
Superheterodyne Receivers
In contrast to the simplicity of the direct-conversion receiver, the
superheterodyne receiver architecture often incorporates mul-
tiple frequency translation stages along with their associated
ﬁlters, ampliﬁers, mixers, and local oscillators (see Fig. 8-8).
But in doing so, this receiver architecture can achieve unmatched
selectivity and sensitivity. Unlike the direct-conversion receiver
in which the LO frequencies are synchronized to the input RF
signals, a superheterodyne receiver uses an LO frequency that
is offset by a ﬁxed amount from the desired signal. This ﬁxed
amount results in an intermediate frequency (IF) generated by
mixing the LO and RF signals in a nonlinear device such as a
diode or FET mixer.
IF filters
Antenna
filter
Mixer
Local
Oscillator (LO)
IF Amp
Mixer
Local
Oscillator (LO)
Demodulation
RF Stage
IF Stage
Baseband
Stage
Frequency
changer
Frequency
changer
FIG. 8-8.
Superheterodyne Architecture.
Generating local oscillators
The LO is often a phase-locked voltage-controlled oscillator
(VCO) capable of covering the frequency range of interest for
translating incoming RF signals to a desired IF range. In recent
years, a number of other frequency-stabilization techniques,
including analog fractional-N frequency synthesis and integer-
N frequency synthesis as well as direct-digital-synthesis (DDS)
approaches, havebeenusedtogeneratetheLOsignalsinwireless
receiver architectures for frequency translation.
Any LO approach should provide signals over a frequency band
of interest with the capability of tuning in frequency increments
that support the system’s channel bandwidths. For example, a
system with 25-kHz channels is not well supported by a synthe-
sized LO capable of tuning in minimum steps of only 1 MHz.
In addition, the LO should provide acceptable single-sideband
(SSB) phase-noise performance, speciﬁed at an offset frequency
that coincides with the system’s channel spacing. Referring to
an LO’s SSB phase noise offset 1 MHz from the carrier will
not provide enough information about the phase noise that is
closer to the carrier and that may affect communications systems

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Basic Receiver Architectures
performanceincloselyspacedchannels. Phasenoiseclosertothe
carrier is typically speciﬁed at offset frequencies of 1 kHz or less.
The LO source should also provide adequate drive power for
the front-end mixers. In some cases, an LO buffer ampliﬁer
may be added to increase the signal source’s output to the level
required to achieve acceptable conversion loss in the mixer. And
for portable applications, the power supply and power consump-
tion of the LO become important considerations when planning
for a power budget.
Mixers
Mixers are an integral component in any modern radio front end
(see Fig. 8-9). Frequency mixers can be based on a number of
different nonlinear semiconductor devices, including diodes and
ﬁeld-effect transistors (FETs). Because of their simplicity and
capability of operation without DC bias, diode mixers have been
prevalent in many wireless systems. Mixers based on diodes
have been developed in several topologies, including single-
ended, single-balanced, and double-balanced mixers.Additional
variations on these conﬁgurations are also available, such as
image-reject mixers and harmonic mixers which are typically
employed at higher, often millimeter-wave, frequencies.
Mixer
f1f2
f1f2
FIG. 8-9.
Circuit symbol for radio mixer—or a diode multiplier in this
example.
The simplest diode mixer is the single-ended mixer, which can be
formed with an input balanced-unbalanced (balun) transformer,
a single diode, an RF choke, and a lowpass ﬁlter. In a single-
diode mixer, insertion loss results from conversion loss, diode
loss, transformer loss. The mixer sideband conversion is nomi-
nally 3 dB, while the transformer losses (balun losses) are about
0.75 dB on each side, and there are diode losses because of the
series resistances of the diodes. The equivalent circuit of a diode
consists of a series resistor and a time-variable electronic resistor.
Moving up slightly in complexity, a single-ended mixer consists
of a single diode, input matching circuitry, balanced-unbalanced
(balun) transformer or some other means for injecting a mixing
signal with the RF input signal, and a lowpass or bandpass ﬁlter
to pass desired mixer products and reject unwanted signal com-
ponents. Single-ended mixers are inexpensive and often used in
low-cost detectors, such as motion detectors. The input balun
must be highly selective to prevent radiation of the LO signal
back into the RF port and out of the antenna.
Although the behavior of the diode changes with LO level, it can
be matched for impedance at a particular frequency, such as the
LO frequency, to achieve fairly consistent conversion-loss per-
formance and ﬂatness. The desired frequency converted signals
are available at the IF port; the ﬁlter eliminates the unwanted
high-frequency signal components generated by the mixing pro-
cess. The LO drive level can be arbitrary, although different types
of mixers and their diodes generally dictate an optimum LO drive
level for mixer operation. The dimensions of the diode will dic-
tate the frequency of operation, allowing use through millimeter-
wave frequencies if the diode is made sufﬁciently small.
Some single-ended mixers use an antiparallel diode pair in place
of the single diode to double the LO frequency and use the sec-
ond harmonics of the LO’s fundamental frequency, somewhat
simplifying the IF ﬁltering requirements. The trade-off involves
having to supply higher LO power in order to achieve sufﬁcient
mixing power by means of the LO’s second-harmonic signals.
A single-balanced mixer uses two diodes connected back to back.
In the back-to-back conﬁguration, noise components from the
LO or RF that are fed into one diode are generated in the opposite
sense in the other diode and tend to cancel at the IF port.
A double-balanced mixer is typically formed with four diodes
in a quad conﬁguration (see Fig. 8-10). The quad conﬁguration
provides excellent suppression of spurious mixing products and
good isolation between all ports. Because of the symmetry, the
LO voltage is sufﬁciently isolated from the RF input port and no
RF voltage appears at the LO port. With a sufﬁciently large LO
drive level, strong conduction occurs in alternate pairs of diodes,
changing them from a low to high resistance state during each
half of the LO’s frequency cycle.
FIG. 8-10.
Circuit schematic for a diode ring, double-balanced mixer.
Because the RF voltage is distributed across the four diodes, the
1-dB compression point is higher than that of a single-balanced
mixer, although more LO power is needed for mixing. The con-
version loss of a double-balanced mixer is similar to that of
a single-balanced mixer, although the dynamic range of the
double-balanced mixer is much greater due to the increase in
the intercept point (recall IP discussion from earlier chapters).
By incorporating FET or bipolar transistors into monolithic IC
mixer topologies, it is possible to produce active mixers with
conversion gain rather than conversion loss. In general, this class
of mixer can be operated with lower LO drive levels than passive
FET or diode mixers, although active mixers will also distort
when fed with excessive LO drive levels.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
Desired signal F
(FLOIF)
Undesired signal
(FLO IF)
Oscillator
signal FLO
Separation  IF
Image signal
(F  2(IF))
RF Amplified
signal
FIG. 8-11.
Mixing results in unwanted frequencies, including image
signals.
For RF front ends, wireless receivers, or even complete
transceivers fabricated using monolithic IC semiconductor pro-
cesses, the Gilbert cell mixer is a popular topology for its
combination of low power consumption, high gain, and wide
bandwidth. Originally designed as an analog four-quadrant mul-
tiplier for small-signal applications, the Gilbert-cell mixer can
also be used in switching-mode operation for mixing purposes.
Because it requires differential signals, the Gilbert-cell mixer is
usually implemented with input and output transformers in the
manner of double-balanced mixers.
Intermodulation and intercept points
The mixer generates IF signals that result from the sum and
difference of the LO and RF signals combined in the mixer:
fIF = fLO ± fRF
(Eq. 8-1)
These sum and difference signals at the IF port are of equal
amplitude, but generally only the difference signal is desired
for processing and demodulation so the sum frequency (also
knownastheimagesignal—seeFig.8-11)mustberemoved, typ-
ically by means of IF bandpass or lowpass ﬁltering. A secondary
IF signal, which can be called f ∗
IF, is also produced at the IF
EXAMPLE: INTERMODULATION AND INTERCEPT POINTS
To get a better understanding of intermodulation products,
let’s consider the simple case of two frequencies, say f1
and f2. To deﬁne the products, we add the harmonic
multiplying constants of the two frequencies. For example,
the second order intermodulation products are (f1 + f2);
the third order are (2f1 −f2); the fourth order are (2f1 + f2);
the ﬁfth order are (3f1 −f2); etc. If f1 and f2 are two
frequencies of 100 kHz and 101 kHz—that is, 1 kHz
apart—then we get the intermodulation products as shown
in Table 8-1.
From the table it becomes apparent that only the odd order
intermodulation products are close to the two fundamental
frequencies of f1 and f2. Note that one third order product
(2f1 −f2) is only 1 kHz lower in frequency than f1 and another
Intermodulation
Ex: f 1 = 100 kHz,
Order
Products
f 2 = 101 kHz
1st Order
100 kHz
101 kHz
2nd Order
f1 + f2
f2 −f1
201 kHz
1 kHz
3rd Order
2f1 −fs2
2f2 −f1
99 kHz
102 kHz
2f1 + f2
2f2 + f1
301 kHz
302 kHz
4th Order
2f2 + 2f1
2f2 −2f1 402 kHz
2 kHz
5th Order
3f1 −2f2
3f2 −2f1
98 kHz
103 kHz
3f1 + 2f2
3f2 + 2f1 502 kHz
503 kHz
TABLE 8-1.
Intermodulation Products
Continued on next page
port as a result of the sum frequency reﬂecting back into the
mixer and combining with the second harmonic of the LO signal.
Mathematically, this secondary signal appears as:
IF = ±[2fLO −( fLO −fRF)]
(Eq. 8-2)
This secondary IF signal is at the same frequency as the pri-
mary IF signal. Unfortunately, differences in phase between
the two signals typically result in uneven mixer conversion-loss
response. But ﬂat IF response can be achieved by maintaining
constant impedance between the IF port and following compo-
nent load (IF ﬁlter and ampliﬁer) so that the sum frequency sig-
nalsarepreventedfromre-enteringthemixer. Intermsofdiscrete
components, some manufacturers offer constant-impedance IF
bandpass ﬁlters that serve to minimize the disruptive reﬂection
of these secondary IF signals. Such ﬁlters attenuate the unwanted
sum frequency signals by absorption. Essentially, the return loss
of the ﬁlter determines the level of the sum frequency signal that
is reﬂected back into the mixer.
If a mixer’s IF port is terminated with a conventional IF ﬁlter,
such as a bandpass or lowpass type, the sum frequency signal
will re-enter the mixer and generate intermodulation distortion.
One of the main intermodulation products of concern is the two-
tone, third-order product, which is separated from the IF by the
same frequency spacing as the RF signal. These intermodulation
frequencies are a result of the mixing of spurious and harmonic
responses from the LO and the input RF signals:
fLO = ±(2fRF1 −fRF2)
(Eq. 8-3)
fLO = ±(2fRF2 −fRF1)
(Eq. 8-4)
But by careful impedance matching of the IF ﬁlter to the mixer’s
IF port, the effects of the sum frequency products and their
intermodulation distortion can be minimized.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Basic Receiver Architectures
EXAMPLE INTERMODULATION AND INTERCEPT
POINTS—(Cont)
(2f2 −f1) is only 1 kHz above f2. The ﬁfth order product is also
closer to the fundamentals than corresponding even order
products.
These odd order intermodulation products are of interest in
the ﬁrst mixer state of a superheterodyne receiver. As we have
seen earlier, the very function of a mixer stage—namely,
forming an intermediate lower frequency from the
sum/difference of the input signal and a local oscillatory—
results in the production of nonlinearity. Not surprisingly, the
mixer stage is a primary source of unwanted intermodulation
products. Consider this example: A receiver is tuned to a
signal on 1000 kHz but there are also two strong signals, f1 on
1020 kHz and f2 on 1040 kHz. The closest signal is only 20 kHz
away. Our IF stage ﬁlter is sharp with a 2.5-kHz bandwidth,
which is quite capable of rejecting the unwanted 1020-kHz
signal. However, the RF stages before the mixer are not so
selective and the two signals f1 and f2 are seen at the mixer
input. As such, intermodulation components are readily
produced, including a third order intermodulation component
(2f1 −f2) at (2 × 1020 −1040) = 1000 kHz. This
intermodulation product lies right on our input signal
frequency! Such intermodulation components or out-of-band
signals can easily cause interference within the working band
of the receiver.
In terms of physical measurements, the two-tone, third-order
intermodulation is the easiest to measure of
the intermodulation interferences in an RF system. All that is
needed is to have two carriers of equal power levels that are
near the same frequency. The result of this measurement is
used to determine the third-order intermodulation intercept
point (IIP3), a theoretical level used to calculate third-order
intermodulation levels at any total power level signiﬁcantly
lower than the intercept point.
The IP3 is the theoretical point on the RF input vs. IF output
curve where the desired input signal and third-order products
become equal in amplitude as the RF input is raised. Table 8-2
explains the meaning of the three critical intercept points in RF
receiver design.
Order Intercept Points
Meaning
1 dB—1dB compression
Compression is a measure of the
point
linearity of a device. As the RF
input signal level increases the IF
output should follow for a mixing
device. However, when the IF
output cannot follow the RF
input linearly and deviates by
1dB, this is referred to as the
1dB compression point.
IP2—Second-order
The second-order intercept
intercept point
point is the theoretical point on
the RF input vs. IF output curve
where the desired input signal
and second order products
become equal in amplitude as
the RF input is raised.
IP3—Third-order
The third-order intercept point
intercept point
is the theoretical point on the
RF input vs. IF output curve
where the desired input signal
and third-order products become
equal in amplitude as the RF
input is raised. Note: IIP3 is the
input-referred IP3. IIP3 is just
the output-referred IP3 (OIP3)
divided by the small-signal gain.
TABLE 8-2.
Intercept Points
Preselection ﬁlters
In a typical superheterodyne receiver architecture, the LO is
offset by a precise ﬁxed amount equal to the IF. The “image”
version of the generated IF signal is separated from the desired
signal frequency by a difference equal to twice the IF. In
order to minimize the effects of unwanted signals entering
the frequency-conversion mixer, a superheterodyne receiver
employs a preselection ﬁlter in the front end to remove these
unwanted signal products. An input matching network provides
the impedance matching required to maximize energy ﬂow from
thereceiveantennatothepreselectorﬁlterandtotheRFampliﬁer
in a superheterodyne receiver. One of the goals of this match-
ing circuitry is to minimize losses from the antenna coupling
circuitry to the preselector ﬁlter, since such losses can decrease
overall receiver sensitivity.
The impedance match between the receive antenna and the
receiver’s front-end circuitry may be subject to change. Some
receivers, for example, may be used with different antennas, in
which case the match would change with each antenna. And
in some mobile applications, the effects of buildings, foliage,
and other environmental factors can alter the impedance of the
antenna and the consequent match with the front-end compo-
nents. In addition, the impedance match between the antenna
and front-end components is frequency-dependent and will
be a function of the particular frequency bands for the com-
munications system. In some cases, when the antenna must

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
cover a broad range of frequencies, it may be necessary to
employ mechanical or electrical tuning to achieve an opti-
mum impedance match for different receiver frequencies of
interest.
Filter losses can impact overall superheterodyne receiver noise
ﬁgure. Because high selectivity is needed to remove unwanted
spurious and image signals from the receiver signal chain,
preselection ﬁltering is often broken into several stages with
intervening LNAs between stages to minimize the effects of
ﬁlter losses on receiver noise ﬁgure. In essence, this balance
between ﬁlter losses and LNA gain in a superheterodyne receiver
front end determines the overall selectivity and sensitivity of the
receiver.
In a superheterodyne receiver, any ﬁltering pertaining to the
communications channel is performed at IF. Typically, ﬁxed
rather than tunable ﬁlters are used at IF since it is much
more difﬁcult to maintain constant bandwidth in a tunable
ﬁlter than in a ﬁxed ﬁlter. When different types of sig-
nals and modulation must be handled, the IF bandwidth can
be readily changed by switching between different ﬁxed ﬁl-
ters. In general, a superheterodyne receiver enables high
selectivity and high sensitivity because of the amount of pro-
cessing that is possible at IF: ﬁltering and ampliﬁcation is
simply easier and cheaper to achieve at IF than at microwave
frequencies.
Although a superheterodyne receiver introduces problems with
spurious responses that do not exist with the other receiver
architectures, it is the ease and cost-effectiveness of ﬁltering
and boosting signals at IF that makes this conﬁguration so
attractive for wireless applications. In reviewing those two key
parameters—sensitivity and selectivity—that characterize the
performance of a superheterodyne front end, let’s examine the
factors that impact each parameter and how they affect overall
receiver performance.
The sensitivity of a superheterodyne receiver is relative to an
acceptable level of performance, such as the sensitivity for a
given SNR in an analog radio front end or for a given bit-
error rate (BER) in a digital radio front end. The sensitivity
refers to the weakest possible signal level that a radio front end
can process to achieve that agreed-upon SNR or BER. Sensi-
tivity is affected by the level of noise external to the receiver
and generated within the receiver itself. If the external noise is
low enough, then the limit to receiver sensitivity will be estab-
lished by the noise generated by the receiver’s own components.
Noise is contributed to a receiver by means of the receiving
antenna, by contributions from the RF preselector ﬁlter, and
from the active devices in the receiving system, including the
front-end LNA.
System sensitivity and noise
The noise from each component in the front end adds to the
receiver’s noise ﬂoor, which sets the limit on the minimum signal
levelthatcanbedetected. Noisecanbecharacterizedbyitspower
spectral density (PSD), which is the power contained within a
given bandwidth and is presented in units of watts per hertz.
Every electronic component contributes some amount of noise
to a receiving system, with the minimum amount of noise related
to temperature known as the system’s thermal noise, or kTB,
where k is Boltzmann’s constant 1.38 × 10−20 mW/K, T is the
temperature in degrees Kelvin (K), and B is the noise bandwidth
(in Hz).
At room temperature, the thermal noise generated in a 1-Hz
bandwidth is
kTB = (1.38 × 10−23J/K)(293K)(1 Hz)
= 4.057 × 10−21 W = −174 dBm
or −174 dBm/Hz in terms of PSD.
With an increase in bandwidth comes an increase in noise power
and thus the importance of ﬁltering in a superheterodyne receiver
asameansoflimitingthenoisepower. Forthisreason, theﬁnalIF
ﬁlter in a superheterodyne receiver is made as narrow as possible
to support the channel reception and to limit the amount of noise
in the channel just prior to demodulation and detection. The ﬁnal
IF ﬁlter determines the noise bandwidth of the receiver, since it
will be the most narrowband component in the front-end analog
signal chain prior to detection.
Front-end receiver components are characterized in terms of
noise by several parameters, including noise ﬁgure (NF) and
noise factor (F). For the receiver as a whole, the noise factor is
simply a ratio of the SNR at the output of the receiver compared
to the SNR at the source of the receiver. For each component,
similarly, the noise factor is the ratio of the SNR at the output to
the SNR at the input. The noise ﬁgure is identical to the noise
factor, except that it is given in dB. The noise factor is a pure
ratio:
Noise factor = (Output SNR2)/(Input SNR1)
(Eq. 8-5)
while the noise ﬁgure is presented in logarithmic form as
NF = 10 log(SNR2/SNR1)
(Eq. 8-6)
where SNR2 is the output SNR of a component, device, or
receiver and SNR1 is the input SNR of the component, device,
or receiver.
If an ampliﬁer was ideal or a component completely without
noise, its noise ﬁgure would equal 0 dB. In reality, the noise
ﬁgure of an ampliﬁer or component is always positive. For a
passive device, the noise ﬁgure is equal to the insertion loss of
the device. For example, the noise ﬁgure of a 1-dB attenuator
without losses beyond the attenuation value is 1 dB.
In a superheterodyne front end, the noise power of the compo-
nents that are connected or cascaded together rises from the input
to the output as the noise from succeeding stages is added to the
system. In a simple calculation of how the noise contributions
of front-end stages add together, there is the well-known Friis’s
equation:
NFcascade = 10 log{[F1 + (F2 −1)]/A1}
(Eq. 8-7)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Basic Receiver Architectures
where F = the noise factor, which is equivalent to 10NF/10 and A
is the numerical power gain, which is equal to 10G/10 where G is
the power gain is dB. From this equation, it can be seen how the
noise factor of the ﬁrst stage in the system (F1) has a dominant
effect on the overall noise performance of the receiver system.
Noise factor can be used in the calculation of the overall added
noise of a series of cascaded components in a receiver, using the
gain and noise factor values of the different components:
F = F1 + F2 −1
+ F3 −1
A1A2
Fn −1
A1A2 . . . An−1
(Eq. 8-8)
where the F parameters represent the noise factor values of
the different front-end stages and the A parameters represent
the numeric power gain levels of the different front-end stages.
A quick look at this equation again shows the weight of the
ﬁrst noise stage on the overall noise factor. In a receiver with
ﬁve noise-contributing stages (n = 5), for example, the noise of
the ﬁnal stages is greatly reduced by the combined gain of the
components.
The noise ﬂoor of a receiver determines its sensitivity to low-
level signals and its capability of detecting and demodulating
those signals. The input referred noise level (noise at the antenna
prior to the addition of noise by the other analog components in
the receiver front end) is sometimes referred to as the minimum
detectable signal (MDS). In some cases, a parameter known
as signal in noise and distortion (SINAD) may also be used
to characterize a receiver’s noise performance, especially with
a need to account for signals with noiselike distortion com-
ponents. This parameter includes carrier-generated harmonics
and other nonlinear distortion components in an evaluation of
receiver sensitivity.
In a digital system, it is simpler to measure the bit-error rate (BER)
induced by noise when a signal is weak. The BER affects the data rate
so it is a more useful performance measure than the SNR for evalu-
ating receiver sensitivity. With BER, the receiver’s sensitivity can be
referenced to a particular BER value. Typically a BER of 0.1%—e.g.,
in the GSM standard—is speciﬁed and the sensitivity of the receiver
is measured by adjusting the level of the input signal until this BER is
achieved at the output of the receiver.
A front end’s noise ﬂoor is principally established by noise in
components such as thermal noise, shot noise and ﬂicker noise.
At the same time, any decrease in gain will increase the noise
ﬂoor. Thus, there must be enough margins in the system SNR to
allow for a reduction in gain when making adjustments in gain
for larger-level signals.
Front-End Ampliﬁers
The RF front-end component most commonly connected to an
RF or IF ﬁlter is an RF or IF ampliﬁer, respectively. Depending
upon its function in the system, this ampliﬁer may be designed
for high output power (in the transmitter) or low-noise perfor-
mance (in the receiver). At the receiver antenna, the receiver
sensitivity will be a function of the ability of the preselector ﬁlter
to limit incoming wideband noise and the front-end’s low-noise
ampliﬁer (LNA) to provide enough gain to boost signal levels to
an acceptable signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) for subsequent signal
processing in the RF front end by mixers, demodulators, and/or
ADCs.
As with the ﬁlters, an RF front-end’s LNAs are speciﬁed depend-
ing on their location in the signal chain, either for relatively
broadband use or for channelized use at the IF stages. An LNA
is speciﬁed in terms of bandwidth, noise ﬁgure, small-signal
gain, power supply and power consumption, output power at
1-dB compression, and linearity requirements. The linearity is
usually judged in terms of third-order and second-order inter-
cept points to determine the expected behavior of the ampliﬁer
when subjected to relatively large-level input signals. Ideally, an
LNA can provide sufﬁcient gain to render even low-level signals
usable by the RF front-end’s mixers and other components, while
also handling high-level signals without excessive distortion.
At one time, LNAs fabricated with gallium arsenide (GaAs)
process technology provided optimum performance in terms of
noise ﬁgure and gain in RF and microwave communications sys-
tems. But ever-improving performance in silicon-germanium
(SiGe) heterojunction-bipolar-transistor (HBT) now provides
comparable or better noise-ﬁgure and gain performance in LNAs
at frequencies through about 10 GHz.
In contrast to a superheterodyne receiver’s noise, the other end of
thedynamicrangeisthelargestsignalthatthereceivercanhandle
without distortion or, in the case of a digital receiver, degrada-
tion of the BER. In a receiver, excessively high signal levels can
bring the onset of nonlinear behavior in the receiver’s compo-
nents, especially the mixers and LNAs. Such nonlinear effects
are evidenced as gain compression, intermodulation distortion,
and cross modulation, such as AM-to-PM conversion.
At large signal levels, harmonic and intermodulation distortion
cause compression and interference that limit the largest signals
that a receiver can handle. A receiver’s dynamic range refers to
the difference between the MDS and the maximum signal level.
In a single-channel system, the dynamic range is essentially the
difference between the 1-dB compressed output power and the
output noise ﬂoor. The spurious-free dynamic range (SFDR) is
deﬁned as the range of input power levels from which the output
signal just exceeds the output noise ﬂoor, and for which any
distortion components remain buried below the noise ﬂoor.
The input third-order intercept point is often used as a measure
of component and receiver power-handling capability. As men-
tioned earlier, it is deﬁned as the extrapolated input power level
per tone that would cause the output third-order intermodula-
tion products to equal the single-tone linear fundamental output
power. The output power at that point is the output third-order
intercept point. The intercept point is ﬁctitious in that it is nec-
essary to extrapolate the fundamental component in a linear
fashion and assume that the third-order intermodulation prod-
ucts increase forever with a 3:1 slope. In reality, the difference

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
between a component’s actual output power at 1-dB compres-
sion and the third-order intercept point can be as little as 6 dB
and as much as 20 dB.Along with the third-order intercept point,
the second-order intercept point is also used as a measure of
power-handling capability of dynamic range. It refers to the
ﬁctitious intersection of the second-harmonic output power with
the fundamental-frequency output power.
In analyzing a receiver’s dynamic range, it is important to note
how the deﬁnitions of larger signals can vary. For example, for
multiple-carrier communications systems, the peak power level
will be much greater than the average power level because of the
random phases of the multiple carriers and how they combine
in phase. In a multicarrier system, the speciﬁed average power
may be within the linear region of the system but the peaks
may push the system into nonlinear behavior. This nonlinear
behavior includes a phenomenon known as spectral regrowth
and is characterized by such parameters as adjacent-channel
power ratio (ACPR) where the power of a transmitted signal can
literally leak into nearby channels because of intermodulation
distortion.
Automatic gain control (AGC) can be used in a superheterodyne
front end to decrease the gain when strong signals can cause
overload or distortion, although there may be trade-offs for the
SNR performance. If attenuation is added before the LNA in a
receiver front end, for example, it can reduce the risk of non-
linearities caused by large signals at the cost of an increase in
noise ﬁgure, as noted earlier with the 1-dB attenuator example.
An AGC tends to sacriﬁce small-signal performance to achieve
large-signal handling capability.
Selectivity
So far, this front-end discussion has covered sensitivity and
dynamic range. Another important aspect of receiver design
is achieving good selectivity, so that signals of interest are
processed and unwanted spurious and interference signals are
properly rejected or attenuated. Selectivity can be thought of
as the capability of a receiver to separate a signal or signals
at a given frequency or bandwidth from all other frequencies.
Selectivity is generally a function of the matching networks
between components, the ﬁlters, and the ampliﬁers in a front-
end design. Achieving good selectivity with a ﬁlter, for example,
requires that the ﬁlter achieve a wide enough passband to channel
the designed signals and their modulation, but provide a sharp
enough response with adequate rejection to eliminate unwanted
signals not falling in the desired passband. Selectivity can also
be thought of as the amount of rejection needed to reduce the
level of an unwanted signal to some required amount at some
nominal frequency from the desired passband. Selectivity can
be achieved at different stages in a superheterodyne receiver,
by using selective components and devices at the RF, IF, and
baseband stages.
Receiver front-end selectivity should be as high as possible
close to the antenna to remove large interfering signals before
they enter the active devices in later stages and cause problems
with distortion and overloading. For selective ﬁlters, impedance
matching can be difﬁcult and can adversely affect the perfor-
mance of the other components in the front-end signal chain,
notably the mixers.
Filters come in essentially four types: bandpass, band-reject,
lowpass, and highpass ﬁlters. (For a more detailed discussion of
ﬁlters, see Chapter 3.) A bandpass ﬁlter channels signals with
minimal attenuation through a range of frequencies known as
the passband, and rejects signals at frequencies above and below
the passband. A band-reject ﬁlter (also known as a notch ﬁlter)
is essentially the opposite of a bandpass ﬁlter. It rejects signals
across one band (known as the stop band) and allows signals to
passwithminimalattenuationatfrequenciesaboveandbelowthe
stop band.A lowpass ﬁlter channels signals with minimal attenu-
ation below a speciﬁed cutoff frequency, while rejecting signals
above that cutoff frequency. The cutoff frequency is commonly a
point at which signal attenuation reaches 3 dB. A highpass ﬁlter
is essentially the opposite of a lowpass ﬁlter, rejecting signals
below the cutoff frequency and passing signals with minimal
attenuation above the cutoff frequency.
Filters are judged in terms of a number of performance parame-
ters, including insertion loss, return loss (or VSWR), rejection,
ripple, selectivity (amplitude-versus-frequency response), group
delay (how long a signal takes to propagate through a ﬁlter),
phase response, and quality factor (Q). In a bandpass ﬁlter, inser-
tion loss is the amount of signal attenuation above a 0-dB level
that would be represented by an ideal transmission line in place
of the ﬁlter. Insertion loss occurs due to a ﬁlter’s dissipative
elements (the resistors, inductors, capacitors, and transmission
lines). Rejection is the amount of signal attenuation at speci-
ﬁed points above and below the passband or center frequency,
including the insertion loss.
Bandpass ﬁlters are deﬁned in terms of their center frequency
and the width of their passband. The center frequency of a band-
pass ﬁlter can be deﬁned arithmetically or geometrically. The
geometric deﬁnition is usually employed in the ﬁlter design pro-
cess, while the arithmetic deﬁnition is used to specify a ﬁlter. The
arithmetic center frequency is simply the sum of the lower and
upper bandedges divided by two. For example, for a bandpass
ﬁlter with 3-dB frequencies of 900 and 1000 MHz, the arithmetic
center frequency is (900 + 1000)/2 = 950 MHz.
The Q of a ﬁlter is the ratio of the midband frequency to the band-
width. A narrowband ﬁlter, for example, with 3-dB band edges
of 950 and 1000 MHz (center frequency of 975 MHz) has a Q of
975/50 = 19.5. A bandpass ﬁlter with 3-dB bandwidth of 500 to
1000 MHz would have a much lower Q of 750/500 = 1.5. Filter
Q is related to the bandwidth, with narrower ﬁlter bandwidths
resulting in higher ﬁlter Q values.
In fabricating ﬁlters, high-Q circuit elements (such as trans-
mission lines, capacitors and inductors) are desirable for high-
performance ﬁlter responses. Low-Q circuit elements tend to
yield higher passband insertion loss and lower stopband atten-
uation. And lower-Q elements lead to a rounding of a ﬁlter’s
response, with poorly deﬁned ﬁlter skirts.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Case Study—Modern Communication Receiver
Filter out-of-band rejection or attenuation can be increased
by adding sections, although this also adds complexity and
increases insertion loss due to the additional resonant elements.
A wide range of ﬁlter responses, such as equiripple and linear-
phase responses, are available in modern designs. The equiripple
response, for example, provides minimum amplitude devia-
tions across the passband. A linear-phase ﬁlter is suitable for
preserving the content of pulsed waveforms typically used
in modern communications systems, such as the Orthogonal
Frequency Division Multiplex (OFDM) modulation used in
WiMAX systems.
ADC’S EFFECT ON FRONT-END DESIGN
Analog-to-digital converters (ADCs) are commonly used in
receivers for wireless applications for either IF or baseband sig-
nal sampling. The choice of ADC is generally determined by
the rest of the receiver architecture, and can be affected by the
selectivity of the ﬁlters, the dynamic range afforded by the front-
end ampliﬁers, and the bandwidth and type of modulation to
be processed. For example, the level or dynamic range of sig-
nals expected to be presented to the ADC will dictate the bit
resolution needed for the converter. For example, in an exam-
ple double-downconversion receiver architecture developed for
broadband wireless access (BWA) applications using the IEEE
802.16 WiMAX standard, IF sampling can be performed with a
12-b ADC.
For cases where a single downconversion approach, with a sub-
sequent higher IF, is used, a higher-resolution, 14-b converter
is recommended in order to compensate for the less efﬁcient
selectivity of the single-conversion receiver and to avoid ADC
saturation in the presence of high-level interference signals.
Along with its input bandwidth (which should accommodate
the highest IF of interest for a particular receiver design) and bit
resolution, anADC can also be speciﬁed in terms of its spurious-
free dynamic range (SFDR). TheADC’s sensitivity is inﬂuenced
by wideband noise, including spurious noise, and often can be
improved through the use of an antialiasing ﬁlter at the input
of the ADC to eliminate sampling of noise and high-frequency
spurious products.
To avoid aliasing when converting analog signals to the digital
domain, the ADC sampling frequency must be at least twice the
maximum frequency of the input analog signal. This minimum
sampling condition—derived from Nyquist’s theorem (covered
in earlier chapters)—must be met in order to capture enough
information about the input analog waveform to reconstruct it
accurately.
In addition to selecting anADC for IF or baseband sampling, the
choice of buffer ampliﬁer to feed the input of the converter can
affect the performance possible with a given sampling scheme.
The buffer ampliﬁer should provide the rise/fall time and tran-
sient response to preserve the modulation information of the IF
or baseband signals, while also providing the good amplitude
accuracy and ﬂatness needed to provide signal amplitudes at an
optimum input level to the ADC for sampling.
Now let’s consider an example using lowpass signals where
the desired bandwidth goes from 0 (DC) to some maximum
frequency ( fMAX). The Nyquist criterion states that the sampling
frequency needs to be at least 2fMAX. So, if theADC is sampling
at a clock rate of 20 MHz, this would imply that the maximum
frequency it can accept is 10 MHz. But then how could an FM
radio broadcast signal (say, at 91.5 MHz) be converted using
such a relatively low sampling rate? Here’s where the design of
the RF front end becomes critical. The RF receiver must support
an intermediate frequency (IF) architecture, which translates a
range of relatively high input frequencies to a lower-frequency
range output (at the IF band). Using the example of the FM radio,
with a tunable bandwidth of 88 to 108 MHz, then the receiver’s
front end must process signals over that tunable bandwidth to a
lower IF range of no higher than 10 MHz. Such a design would
ensure that the previously mentioned 20-MHzADC could handle
these IF signals without aliasing.
SOFTWARE DEFINED RADIOS
Up to this point, we have focused on the hardware implementa-
tion of RF front ends. But the capability of creating RF front-end
architectures that are controlled by software has become a real-
ity, thanks to the continuing migration of analog functionality to
digital chips and the performance improvements in DSP tech-
nology. Today, a designer can use software deﬁned radio (SDR)
systems to process RF signals that were traditionally handled by
analog and RF front-end circuitry. This new approach is being
implemented in next generation, very high frequency (∼6 GHz)
applications that require ﬂexible reconﬁguration of the front
end, like wireless base stations, mobile communication (often
military) devices, and IPTV set-top boxes.
SDR technologies known as “frequency agile” systems allow
the conversion of any analog wireless signal directly into digital
baseband data, regardless of frequency. Semiconductor manu-
facturing processes have typically used gallium arsenide (GaAs)
materials to demonstrate the RF-to-digital (RF/D) converter
chips, though future production versions will convert the design
to low-cost CMOS and BiCMOS technologies.
The great advantage of SDR systems is the on-the-ﬂy interop-
erability among differing communications frequencies. In other
words, a single RF receiver can communicate directly with dif-
ferent devices on multiple different frequency bands, using only
software to receive, translate, and process the different signals.
CASE STUDY—MODERN
COMMUNICATION RECEIVER
In this chapter we have introduced the design architectures com-
mon in most RF front-end receivers. We have deﬁned a number
of key parameters used to characterize the response of a receiver,
including sensitivity and selectivity.
Now let’s see how all of the concepts and parameters ﬁt into the
development of a typical modern communications transceiver.
Such a communication front-end/back-end could be used to
support a common US air interface like second generation

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
Code
Code
Bandwidth
Carrier frequency
Data
bandwidth
Spread spectrum
bandwidth
Noise  interferers 
Spread spectrum
bandwidth
Noise
Modulated
interferers
interferers
Signal
Spread spectrum
bandwidth
FIG. 8-12.
CDMA reception process. (Courtesy of Agilent)
(2G), narrow-band Code Division Multiple Access (CDMA) or
third-generation (3G), multimedia enabled wideband CDMA
(W-CDMA) systems. By changing the RF tuning, this same
architecture could be used for dual–band GSM (used in Europe)
or TDMA systems in the same radio band, since the process-
ing and demodulation is performed in the post-baseband, digital
section.
This last point is important, since this chapter has focused
on traditional analog receiver design as are used in TDMA
designs. As the name implies, Time Division Multiple Access
(TDMA) technology divides a radio channel into sequential time
slices. Each channel user takes turns transmitting and receiving
in a round-robin fashion. TDMA is a popular cellular phone
technology since it provides greater channel capacity than its
predecessor—Frequency Division Multiple Access (FDMA).
Global System for Mobile Communications (GSM), an estab-
lished cellular technology in Asia and Europe, uses a form of
TDMA technology.
In this case study, though, we focus on Code Division Multi-
ple Access (CDMA) designs for two reasons. First, the basic
receiver architecture is similar to TDMA. Second, CDMA
receiverdesignsarepredominantintheUSandaregainingglobal
acceptance.
In CDMA systems, the received signal occupies a relatively
narrow channel within a 60-MHz spectral allocation between
1930 MHz and 1990 MHz. W-CDMA channels operate on a
wider bandwidth (3.84 MHz) than standard CDMA systems. All
CDMA users can transmit at the same time while sharing the
same carrier frequency. A user’s signal appears to be noise for
all except the correct receiver. Thus, the receiver circuit must
decode one signal among many that are transmitted at the same
time and at the same carrier frequency, based on correlation
techniques.
The CDMA reception process is as shown in Fig. 8-12. Sev-
eral mixer stages are required to separate the carrier frequency
and the code bandwidth. Once complete, the desired data sig-
nal can be separated from the “noise” (other user channels) and
interference.
In a modern receiver front-end communication system, the
received signal is ampliﬁed, mixed down to IF, and ﬁltered
before being mixed down to baseband where it is digitized for
demodulation (see Fig. 8-13). A double (multi-mixer) super-
heterodyne architecture is typically used in a CDMA receiver.
The RF front-end consists of the typical duplexer and low-noise
ampliﬁer (LNA) to provide additional signal gain to compen-
sate for signal losses from the subsequent image-reject ﬁlter
and then the ﬁrst mixer. Two downconverter stages are used
between the RF and baseband subsystems. The ﬁrst mixer
downconverts the signal to a ﬁrst IF stage of 183 MHz. The
second mixer completes the downconversion from the IF stage
to baseband. The I/Q outputs from the second mixer stage
are digitally decoded and demodulated in the baseband DSP
subsystem.
The receiver architecture contains an I/Q demodulator to sepa-
rate the information contained in the I (in-phase) and Q (quadra-
ture) signal components prior to the baseband input—recall
earlier discussion on direct conversion techniques. Overall key
receiver requirements (derived from the IS-95/IS-98 standards)
for a CDMA system are deﬁned by (see Fig. 8-14):
• Reference sensitivity is the minimum receiver input
power, at the antenna, at which bit error rate
(BER) <= 10−3. This results in an acceptable noise
power (Pn) within the channel bandwidth of −99 dBm.
The acceptable noise power (−99 dBm) within the
channel bandwidth results in a receiver noise ﬁgure (NF)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Case Study—Modern Communication Receiver
Antenna
filter
IF filters
Mixer
Image
rejection
filter
digital
baseband
RF Stage
IF Stage
Baseband
Stage
FIG. 8-13.
Block diagram of a modern RF communication receiver.
Behavioral models
Input spectrum
System
performances
• Specifications for
blocks (depends on
models and
simulation accuracy)
Gain dB
NF dB
IIP2 dBm
IIP3 (out band)
IIP3 (in band) dBm
2.5
FIG. 8-14.
Typical CDMA system speciﬁcations.
of 9 dB. Recall that the noise ﬁgure of a receiver is the
ratio of the SNR at its input to the SNR at its output. It
characterizes the degradation of the SNR by the receiver
system.
• Adjacent channel selectivity (ACS) is the ratio of the
receive ﬁlter attenuation on the assigned channel
frequency to the receiver ﬁlter attenuation on the
adjacent channel frequency.
• Intermodulation results from nonlinear modulation of
two pure input signals. As mentioned in Chapter 7, when
two or more signals are input to an ampliﬁer
simultaneously, the second-, third-, and higher-order
intermodulation components are caused by the sum and
difference products of each of the fundamental input
signals and their associated harmonics. Of particular
importance to CDMA receiver design is the third-order
intercept point (IP3).
Now let’s consider the issue of measuring and controlling the RF
signal power. On the receive side, the input signal will gener-
ally vary over some dynamic range. This may be due to weather

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
conditions or to the source of the received signal moving away
from the receiver (e.g., a mobile handset being operated in a fast
car). But as explained earlier in this chapter, we want to present
a constant signal level to the analog-to-digital converter (ADC)
to maintain the proper resolution of the ADC. This will also
maximize the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). As a result, receive
signal systems typically use one or more variable gain ampli-
ﬁers (VGAs) that are controlled by power measurement devices
that complete the automatic-gain-control (AGC) loop. Recall the
signal processing on the receive side occurs after the IF andADC
stages.
An inaccurate received signal strength indication (RSSI) mea-
surement can result in a poor leveling of the signal that is
presented to the ADC. This will cause either overdrive of the
ADC (input signal too large) or waste valuable dynamic range
(input signal too small).
IF Ampliﬁer Design
Several ampliﬁers are used in the IF stage of most receivers.
Consider the architecture we’ve been examining, noting one of
these ampliﬁers just prior to the two-stage I/Q mixer. This ampli-
ﬁer can be designed as an analog or digital AGC loop. Where
fast regulation of gain is required, the inherent latency of a dig-
itally controlled automatic gain control (AGC) loop may not be
acceptable. In such situations, an analog AGC loop may be a
good alternative (see Fig. 8-15).
0˚ LO
digital
baseband
Detector
Vref
(e.g. 1V)
Vout
Vin (ac)
Vout (dc)
Vcontrol
Gain
dV/dt = I/C 
FIG. 8-15.
Generic components of a AGC analog ampliﬁer loop.
Beginning at the output of the variable gain ampliﬁer (VGA), this
signal is fed, usually via a directional coupler, to a detector. The
output of the detector drives the input of an op amp, conﬁgured as
an integrator. A reference voltage drives the non-inverting input
of the op amp. Finally the output of the op-amp integrator drives
the gain control input of the VGA. Now, let’s examine how this
circuit works.
We will assume initially that the output of the VGA is at some
low level and that the reference voltage on the integrator is at
1V. The low detector output results in a voltage drop across inte-
grator resistor R. The resulting current through this resistor can
only come from the integrator capacitor C. Current ﬂow in this
direction increases the output voltage of the integrator. This volt-
age, which drives the VGA, increases the gain (we are assuming
that the VGA’s gain control input has a positive sense, that is,
increasing voltage increases gain). The gain will be increased,
thereby increasing the ampliﬁer’s output level until the detector
output equals 1 V. At that point, the current through the resistor/
capacitor will decrease to zero and the integrator output will be
held steady, thereby settling the loop. If capacitor charge is lost
over time, the gain will begin to decrease. However, this leakage
will be quickly corrected by additional integrator current from
the newly reduced detector voltage.
The key usefulness of this circuit lies in its immunity to changes
in the VGA gain control function. From a static perspective at
least, the relationship between gain and gain control voltage is of
no consequence to the overall transfer function. Based upon the
value of Vref, the integrator will set the gain control voltage to
whatever level is necessary to produce the desired output level.
Any temperature dependency in the gain control function will
be eliminated. Also, nonlinearities in the gain transfer function
of the VGA do not appear in the overall transfer function (Vout
vs. Vref). The only requirement is that the gain control function
of the VGA be monotonic. It is crucial however that detector be
temperature stable.
Thecircuitaswehavedescribedithasbeendesignedtoproducea
constantoutputlevelforvaryinginputlevels. Becausethisresults
in a constant output level, it becomes clear that the detector
does not require a wide dynamic range. We only require it to be
temperature stable for input levels that correspond to the setpoint
voltage Vref. For example, the diode detector circuits previously
discussed which have poor temperature stability a low levels but
reasonable stability at high levels, might be a good choice in
applications where the leveled output is quite high.
If, the detector we use has a higher dynamic range, we can
now use this circuit to precisely set VGA output levels over a
wide dynamic range. To do this, the integrator reference volt-
age, Vref, is varied. The voltage range on Vref follows directly
from the detector’s transfer function. For example, if the detec-
tor delivers 0.5V for an input level of −20 dBV, a reference
voltage of 0.5V will cause the loop to settle when the detec-
tor input is −20 dBV (the VGA output will be greater than this
amount by whatever coupling factor exists between VGA and
detector).
The dynamic range for the variable Vout case will be determined
by the device in the circuit with the least dynamic range (i.e.,
gain control range of VGA or linear dynamic range of detector).
Again it should be noted that the VGA does not need a pre-
cise gain control function. The “dynamic range” of the VGA’s

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Case Study—Modern Communication Receiver
gain control in this case is deﬁned as the range over which an
increasing gain control voltage results in increasing gain.
The response time of this loop can be controlled by varying the
RC time constant of the integrator. Setting this at a low level will
result in fast output settling but can result in ringing in the output
envelope. Setting the RC time constant high will give the loop
good stability but will increase settling time.
It is interesting to note that use of the term AGC (automatic
gain control) to describe this circuit architecture is fundamen-
tally incorrect. The term AGC implies that the gain is being
automatically set. In practice, it is the output level that is being
automatically set, so the term ALC (automatic level control)
would be more correct.
This case study has offered just a sample of the many issues that
must be considered when design any communication receiver
system. Numerous books and internet resources are avail-
able for those looking to understand more of the fascinating
technology.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

This page intentionally left blank 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C H A P T E R 9
RF DESIGN
Tools
lectronic design automation (EDA) is a category of
automated design tools used to develop and manufac-
ture the hardware component of a range of electronic
systems including ﬁeld programmable gate arrays
(FPGAs)/programmable logic devices (PLDs), inte-
grated circuits (ICs), printed circuit boards (PCBs), and systems-
on-a-chip (SoCs). These systems often contain a mix of analog,
digital and RF circuitry. While the analog and RF sections of the
system make up a much smaller portion of the design than their
digital counterpart, they are by far the most difﬁcult to design,
requiring substantially more time and expertise. In fact, in sys-
tems design, roughly 75% of the design time is spent on RF
design. Of that 75%, 25% is spent on actual design work and
75% on interface, library and integration issues.
Given these facts, it might be natural to assume that RF design
is today aided by a wealth of highly advanced EDA tools,
ﬂows and methodologies. This is not the case. In fact, EDA
tools and methodologies for the digital realm remain far more
advanced then those which are typically used for analog and
RF design. Even so, automated design tools—whether those of
the inexpensive, web-based variety or those which are costly
and full-featured—can play an important role in enabling you to
create fully optimized RF designs more productively than was
previously possible with more manual techniques.
In this chapter, we will discuss the speciﬁc types of tools which
can aid both the expert and novice design engineer with RF
design tasks. But ﬁrst, we begin by taking a look at exactly what
constitutes an RFIC design ﬂow and the design languages you
will need to know to make that ﬂow work.
DESIGN TOOL BASICS
A wide range of EDA tools are used by RF engineers throughout
the product lifecycle for the design, veriﬁcation and test of RF
circuits. They replace a process in which all design work and
circuit layout was once done by hand in a sequential manner.
The engineer would design a circuit and then hand it “over the
wall” to another engineer who would verify the work. In turn,
the veriﬁed design would then be handed off to an engineer who
would lay out the circuit.
Design tools not only automate this process, but have trans-
formed it from a sequential to a concurrent process as well.
Today, via a methodology known as co-design, many differ-
ent engineers can now work on various parts of a design at
the same time. And the design process now begins at the sys-
tem, as opposed to the circuit, level. The result is increased
productivity and time to market, along with a reduction in
costly, time-consuming errors. And, because EDA tools auto-
mate engineering best practices, acting as a repository of sorts
for engineering expertise, even the novice engineer can be
productive using them.
The most common types of EDA tools used today are:
• Schematic Capture tools—Captures a schematic
representation of a design using components from a
component library.
• Logic Synthesis tools—Translates high-level design
languages into netlists.
• Place-and-Route (P&R) tools—Takes netlists and
decides where to put each wire and transistor in the
design layout.
• Simulation tools—Takes a description of a circuit
(netlist) and simulates its behavior. These tools are
critical to ensuring that you get your design right the
ﬁrst time.
• Veriﬁcation tools—Veriﬁes that a design will work as
expected. Includes Design Rule Checkers (DRCs) and
equivalence checkers which work to verify the design
netlist and that the netlist matches the original design,
respectively.
DESIGN LANGUAGES
Design languages are used to describe, or model, the circuit.
Much of today’s RF design typically begins either by hand with
a textual description or with an algorithmic description of a
data transformation, such as a model in MATLAB or a C/C++
object class. These procedural languages are especially useful in
developing individual untimed algorithms, but they do not work
well as system-level design tools because they lack the built-in
constructs necessary for time and concurrency.
Consider, for example, that in a mobile communication sys-
tem, many algorithms operate at different rates in a base station.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
Algorithms also operate in the handset. Concurrently, RF energy
bounces off objects such as a building or a tree to create a
dynamically fading channel. Modeling the performance of an RF
system realistically under these conditions requires the designer
to capture the concurrency of all of this behavior, in addi-
tion to any signiﬁcant physical properties. This is virtually an
impossible task.
System-level design languages like SystemC or System Verilog
offer a possible patch to this deﬁciency. SystemC, for example,
provides transaction-level modeling constructs by adding a class
library and a kernel to C++.
Whether the design starts life in the form of a system-level or
procedural language, once its implementation is ﬂeshed out, you
will need to leverage a number of different easily accessible tools
to assist in the hardware description language (HDL) coding
process.
An HDL is a standard, text-based expression of the temporal
behavior and/or spatial circuit structure of an electronic sys-
tem. The two leading standard HDLs includeVerilog andVHSIC
Hardware Description Language (VHDL). Both have extensions
(Verilog-AMS and VHDL-AMS) that allow them to work with
analog and mixed-signal designs, including some RF. Generally,
though, RF system design requires many more constructs than
are present in these language extensions. Alternative language
options exist that further extend the analog/mixed signal versions
of Verilog and VHDL into the RF space, but because these addi-
tional constructs are vendor speciﬁc, they constrain the design
database to a speciﬁc vendor.
It is important to note that whichever language you opt to use, the
design description or model will eventually be used to perform
mixed-level (e.g., analog, digital and RF) simulation. Therefore
it may make sense to adopt a language that is broadly supported
by a range of design tools and/or utilized by the rest of your
design team. Many standard EDA tools offer support for a wide
range of standard programming and HDLs.
What follows is a closer look at the languages in use today for
RF design.
Verilog
Verilog is a hardware description language for describing elec-
tronic circuits and systems. It supports the design, veriﬁcation
and implementation of analog, digital, and mixed-signal circuits
at various levels of abstraction and can be used for veriﬁca-
tion through simulation, for timing analysis, test analysis (e.g.,
testability analysis and fault grading) and logic synthesis.
Verilog-AMS
Verilog-AMS is an extension to Verilog that supports analog and
mixed-signal modeling using both continuous-time and event-
driven modeling semantics. It allows designers to use modules
that encapsulate high-level behavioral descriptions as well as
structural descriptions of systems and components.
Verilog-A
Verilog-A is an industry standard modeling language and is
the continuous-time subset of Verilog-AMS. It is speciﬁcally
designed for modeling behavior of analog components. The
behavior of each module can be described mathematically in
terms of its terminals and external parameters applied to the
module. The structure of each component can be described in
terms of interconnected sub-components.
As an example of Verilog A, consider the Advanced Design
System (ADS) and RF Design Environment (RFDE) solutions
from Agilent Technologies (www.agilent/com/ﬁnd/eesof). Both
feature a Verilog-A solution—Verilog-A Compiler—which is
suitable for RF circuit and system design.
Verilog-A Compiler is based on technology fromTiburon Design
Automation and enables simulation speed that is close to built-in
Cmodels. ItcanbeusedtocreatebehavioralmodelsofRFblocks
such as mixers, ampliﬁers, etc., as well as transistor models for
things like MOSFETs, BJTs and HBTs. Many transistor model
examples are provided with the product, and they can be used as
the basis for more complete device models.
A typical simulation status showing the cache creation message
and a compilation/load message is illustrated in Fig. 9-1.
SystemVerilog
SystemVerilog is considered the industry’s ﬁrst uniﬁed hardware
description and veriﬁcation language (HDVL) standard (IEEE
1800), and is a major extension of the established IEEE 1364Ver-
ilog language. Based on extensions to Verilog, it was developed
originally by Accellera to dramatically improve productivity in
the design of large gate-count, intellectual property (IP)-based,
bus-intensive chips. SystemVerilog is targeted primarily at the
chip implementation and veriﬁcation ﬂow, with powerful links
to the system-level design ﬂow.
VHDL
VHDL is a fairly general-purpose language, although it requires
a simulator on which to run the code. It can read and write
ﬁles on the host computer, so a VHDL program can be written
that generates another VHDL program to be incorporated in the
design being developed. As a result, it is possible to use VHDL
to write a testbench that veriﬁes the functionality of the design
using ﬁles on the host computer to deﬁne stimuli, interacts with
the user, and compares results with those expected.
VHDL-AMS
VHDL-Analog MixedSignal(VHDL-AMS),theIEEE-endorsed
standard modeling language (IEEE 1076.1), was created to
provide a general-purpose, easily exchangeable and open lan-
guage for modern analog-mixed-signal designs. Models can
be exchanged between all simulation tools that adhere to the
VHDL-AMS standard. The example in Fig. 9-2 illustrates the
architecture basics of an ampliﬁer in VHDL-AMS.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Design Languages
HPEESOFSIM (*) 2003C.day Dec 14 2003 (built: 12/14/03 21:28:57)
Copyright Agilent Technologies, 1989-2003.
A verilog-A compiled model library (CML) cache has been created at
‘/users/bobl/hpeesof/agilent-model-cache/cml/0.99/hpuxll’
Compiling Verilog-A file
‘/rfdeExamples/VerilogA_Tutorial/sinRampSrc/veriloga/veriloga.va’
AGILENT-VACOMP (*) 2003C.day Dec 14 2003 (built: 12/15/03 01:49:33)
Tiburon Design Automation (R) Verilog-A Compiler Version 0.99.121203.
Copyright (C) Tiburon Design Automation, Inc. 2002-2003. All rights
reserved.
Loading Verilog-A module ‘sinRampSrc’ from
‘/users/bobl/hpeesof/agilent-model-cache/cml/0.99/hpuxll/veriloga_09106/1
ib.hpuxll/veriloga.cml’.
TRAN Tranl[1] <input.ckt> time={0 s->100 ms)
Resource usage:
Total stopwatch time: 23.21 seconds.
FIG. 9-1.
When a Verilog-A cell view is simulated for the ﬁrst time, the Agilent RFDE Verilog-A Compiler compiles the associated Verilog-A code and
caches the result so that it may be used directly in all subsequent simulations of that view.
VHDL-AMS/FD
There are also extensions to VHDL-AMS that are speciﬁcally
geared toward high-frequency design (Fig. 9-3). VHDL-AMS/
Frequency Domain (FD) is an extension language that supports
harmonic balance simulation for frequency domain analysis. It
provides the RF designer with the capability to describe com-
plex microwave and RF devices (e.g., wireless systems) from
architecture to transistors. The RICON Harmonic Balance sim-
ulator is currently the only VHDL-AMS simulator to use the
VHDL-AMS/FD extensions.
VHDL-RF/MW
VHDL-RF/MW is an extension to VHDL-AMS that supports
design at radio and microwave frequencies. Extensions facilitate
non-lumped terminals, ﬁnite-element modeling, parasitics, and
frequency-domain modeling.VHDL-RF/MW is supported in the
FTL Systems’Auriga modeling and veriﬁcation solution which
spans system level, register-transfer-level (RTL), analog/mixed
signal, radio-frequency down to parasitic/microwave detail.
C/C++
C is a general-purpose, procedural, imperative computer pro-
gramming language. C++ is an extension of C that provides
object-oriented functionality with C-like syntax. It adds greater
typing strength, scoping and other tools useful in object-oriented
programming, and permits generic programming via templates
to simplify high-level programming and offer a better approach
to large-scale programming. C++ is also a larger language with
more features and complexity than C, but C++ can improve pro-
ductivity with its greater number of features. A list of features
that C++ supports and C does not includes:
SystemC
SystemC provides hardware-oriented constructs within the con-
text of C++ as a class library implemented in standard
Classes
Inline functions
Member functions
Default arguments
Constructors and
Function overloading
destructors
Derived classes
Namespaces
Virtual functions
Exception handling
Abstract classes
Run-time type identiﬁcation
Access control (public,
// comments
private, protected)
Friend functions
True const
Pointers to members
Declarations as statements
Static members
Automatically typedef struct tags
Mutable members
Type safe linkage
Operator overloading
New and delete
References
Bool keyword
Templates
Safer and more robust casting
C++. Its use spans design and veriﬁcation from concept to
implementation in hardware and software. The language pro-
vides an interoperable modeling platform, which enables the
development and exchange of very fast system-level C++
models. It also provides a stable platform for development of
system-level tools.
MATLAB/RF Toolbox/Simulink
MATLAB is a high-level programming language and interac-
tive, integrated environment, developed by The MathWorks
(www.mathworks.com/products/matlab/). It enables the engi-
neer to perform computationally intensive tasks faster than with

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
-- This model contains simultaneous conditional use statements, but
-- the conditions are such that all quantities are continuous over the
-- switch between equations; thus no "break" is required.
library IEEE;
architecture basic of amplifier is
terminal Cout: electrical;
constant c1: real := imax/(sr*1.0e6);
constant gmnom: real := 2.0 * IEEE.math_real.math_pi * ugf * c1;
constant r1: real := gain/gmnom;
constant dvmax: real := imax/gmnom;
-- The reader will find that diagraming these quantities as the edges of
-- a directed graph on the terminals will aid in understanding the
-- design.
quantity Iinput through Vinput across vin to vinb;
quantity Ivin through refer to vin;
quantity Ivinb through refer to vinb;
quantity Icout through Vcout above refer to cout;
quantity Icout_vout through Vcout_vout above cout to vout;
quantity Vvout_vp above vout to vp;
quantity Vvout_vn above vout to vn;
-- These non-branch quantities are used as temporaries in building up
-- the equation for Icout
quantity gain_current, dp_current, outstage_current: current;
begin
-- local terminal Cout
Icout == gain_current + dp_current - outstage_current;
Icout_vout == Vcout_vout/r0;
-- input stage.
Iinput == Vinput/rin;
Ivin == iin;
Ivinb == iin;
-- gain stage.
-- The following relationship must hold between gmnon,dvmax and imax
-- to prevent a discontinuity in gain_current
assert abs(gmnon*dvmax) = abs(imax);
if Vinput > dvmax use
gain_current == imax;
elsif Vinput < -dvmax use
gain_current == -imax;
else
gain_current == gmnom * Vinput;
end use;
-- dominant pole.
dp_current == c1 * Vcout’dot + Vcout/r1;
-- output stage limiting.
-- outstage_current is zero when Vvout_vp=-so!
ft or Vvout_vn=+soft
-- so there is no discontinuity at the transit
ion points
if Vvout_vp > -soft use
outstage_current == gmnom * (Vvout_vp+soft);
elsif Vvout_vn < soft use
outstage_current == gmnom * (Vvout_vn-soft);
else
outstage_current == 0.0;
end use;
end basic;
FIG. 9-2.
An ampliﬁer, as described in VHDL-AMS. This code example was excerpted from a conference paper entitled “Mixed-Mode Simulation,” by
Kenneth Bakalar from Compass Design Automation, now Synopsys.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Design Languages
entity nonlinear_amp is
generic (k1, k2, k3: real); port (quantity a_in, a_out : real);
end entity amp;
architecture eq of amp is
begin
a_in*k1+a_in**2*k2+a_in**3*k3==a_out; - nonlinear effects included
end architecture;
The example shows that the entity "nonlinear_amp" contains the parameters k1, k2, k3
The test bench for the amplifier is the following:
# amplifier jobs: – comment line
res1=HBparametric([3.e6,5,0.01,1000])# - performs HB
print "================== results ================="
print res1; # - print res1 (complex structure)
print "================== tout.H1 =================".
print res1.getX("tout’reference",[1]) # of "tout’reference" variable
# – gets and prints only spectrum
# of "tout’reference" variable at first harmonic
FIG. 9-3.
Code for deﬁning an ampliﬁer using VHDL-FD. This code example was excerpted from “VHDL-AMS Extensions Enable RF Harmonic Balance
Simulation," originally published in High Frequency Electronics magazine in March 2004 and written by Mark Rencher, Ridgetop Group.
FIG. 9-4.
RF Toolbox from The MathWorks enables engineers to design, model, analyze, and visualize networks of radio frequency components.
traditional programming languages such as C and C++. It is
used for numerical computations, symbolic computations and
scientiﬁc visualizations and runs in interpreted, as opposed to
compiled, mode.
RF toolbox is a MATLAB function and class library that RF
engineers use for designing, modeling, analyzing, and visual-
izing networks of RF components (Fig. 9-4). It works within
the Simulink environment and offers users a library of blocks
to model the behavior of RF ampliﬁers, mixers, ﬁlters, and
transmission lines.
Simulink is a block library tool for modeling, simulating and
analyzing dynamic systems. It works with MATLAB.
SPICE
SPICE is a powerful general-purpose analog circuit simulator,
developed at the University of California, Berkeley. It is used

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
to verify circuit designs and to predict the circuit behavior. It
falls into the category of an equivalent-circuit model software
package. The SPICE simulator was long considered the de-facto
industrial standard for computer-aided circuit analysis. How-
ever, the limitations of SPICE have forced the creation of new
languages like Verilog and VHDL-AMS.
RFIC DESIGN FLOW
The process of chip design from concept to production is called
a design ﬂow. A design methodology is a set of procedures that
accompany a design ﬂow to achieve a particular outcome. For
example, a design tool vendor specializing in locating and iden-
tifying signal integrity issues may develop a methodology that
helps ensure any potential signal integrity issues are eliminated
earlyinthedesignﬂowwhentheyareeasiertoﬁndandcheaperto
ﬁx. Note that most design tool vendors, especially those known
for offering solutions that span the entire product lifecycle (e.g.,
from R&D to production), typically offer their own individual
ﬂows and methodologies.
A typical RFIC design ﬂow is pictured in Fig. 9-5. Recall that
while digital designers have grown accustomed to uniﬁed design
ﬂows, RF designers must often piece together tools from various
vendors to develop a uniﬁed ﬂow for their designs. EDA ven-
dors like Agilent Technologies, Ansoft, Applied Wave Research
(AWR), Cadence Design Systems, and Mentor Graphics are now
working to rectify this situation via the development of RFIC
System Design and
Behavioral Modeling
Testbench Development
Circuit
Specifications
Circuit Design w/
Idealized Interconnect
Foundry
Design Kit
Time and
Frequency
Domain
Circuit
Simulation
Design/Extraction of
Critical On-Chip Passives
Design/Extraction of
Package Parasitics
Electromagnetic
Layout Extraction
Layout
Verification in
System Testbench
Tapeout or
Chip Integration
FIG. 9-5.
This ﬂow chart, courtesy of UMC, depicts a typical RFIC design
and veriﬁcation ﬂow.
ﬂows developed around their key RF design tools and platforms.
Therefore, while the ﬂow depicted in Fig. 9-5 may be typical, it
is by no means the only possible RFIC ﬂow available today.
A functional representation of this ﬂow is provided in Fig. 9-6.
The key steps that comprise this ﬂow are system design, cir-
cuit design (e.g., design capture and simulation), circuit layout,
parasitic extraction, and full-chip veriﬁcation.
System Design
During the system-level design phase, an RF speciﬁcation in the
form of a behavioral model is created using either Matlab, C or
some other system-level design language. A behavioral model is
essentiallyamodelthatdescribeswhatthesystemdoes. Tocreate
the model, the engineer begins with perfect RF components and
then adjusts the performance speciﬁcations of the components
until performance degradation occurs. The goal of this process
is to determine what level of noise, nonlinearity, and frequency
domain distortions the system can tolerate.
A behavioral testbench is also developed during this phase. It will
serve as the framework for more complex mixed-level (e.g., ana-
log, digital and RF) simulations, where blocks can be inserted at
the transistor level and veriﬁed in a system context. The behav-
ioral model and testbench are often referred to as an executable
speciﬁcation and are used together to validate the speciﬁcation.
Once the speciﬁcation has passed veriﬁcation (via any number of
functional veriﬁcation tools), it is passed to the circuit designer
Design flow
System design and
behavioral modeling
Schematic entry and
design enviornment
Time and frequency
domain circuit simulation
Parasitic extraction
DRC and LVS
Layout
Electromagnetic
extraction
Verification in
system bench
FIG. 9-6.
Functional design ﬂow representation.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

RFIC Design Flow
FIG. 9-7.
The Visual System Simulator (VSS) from Applied Wave Research
is a comprehensive software suite for the design of complete, end-to-end
communications systems. The tool’s RFA RF Budget Analysis module,
shown here, enables designers to ﬁnd potential pitfalls early in the design
process, at the system-level design phase, thereby saving signiﬁcant design
cycle time and speeding products to market. Using it, designers can make
traditional RF cascaded measurements such as gain, noise ﬁgure, and
third-order intercept, inclusive of image noise, along a communication link.
where the detailed design, RTL or board-level schematics, are
created and compared to the original behavioral description.
When they match, the design is deemed “functionally” complete.
Note that the engineer might also utilize an advanced architec-
tural planning tool to help determine the design’s speciﬁcation
(Fig. 9-7). Such tools work by allowing the engineer to spec-
ify the correct system architecture. They then generate suitable
speciﬁcations for each of the underlying components in complex
communications designs. As a result, they help designers reduce
time-to-market by eliminating iterations and rework, and cut
system costs by ensuring that components are not over-speciﬁed
and thus unnecessarily expensive.
Circuit Design
During the circuit design phase, the veriﬁed executable speciﬁ-
cation is further reﬁned to incorporate results generated by the
engineer while creating the actual circuit design. The process
normally begins with the conversion of the speciﬁcation into a
block diagram of the various functions that the circuit must per-
form. The various blocks are considered in detail still—at an
abstract stage—but with much more focus on the details of the
electrical functions to be provided. The block diagram is then
synthesized into a netlist for simulation. This will allow the engi-
neer to ﬁnd mistakes early in the design cycle before a physical
device is fabricated.
Circuit simulation is performed in the time and frequency
domains to characterize critical performance metrics. The choice
of domain will depend on a number of factors including: the type
of circuit and its size, the type of simulation and desired output,
the designer’s comfort level, and any personal preference the
designer may have (Fig. 9-8). As circuits are completed at block
level, they are veriﬁed within the top-level context with behav-
ioral stimulus and descriptions for the surrounding chip. If the
engineer is unable to achieve the speciﬁcation for a certain com-
ponent, the system-level model and executable speciﬁcation can
be modiﬁed accordingly.
There are two important things to note during the circuit-design
phase. First, it is common during this stage to employ the use
of modeling tools (e.g., for spiral inductors). This task will be
discussed in detail later in the chapter. It is worth noting, how-
ever, that these tools allow you to determine what is and is not
feasible to achieve with your circuit. The information that you
obtain from this exercise is then fed back into earlier stages of
the design process to verify system-level performance.
Secondly, prior to the start of the circuit design phase, the engi-
neer will select a process technology (e.g., 0.18 or 0.25 micron
design geometries). Once this selection is made, a process design
kit (PDK) can be obtained from the appropriate foundry or IC
fabrication house and installed within your design environment.
The PDK helps jump start the design process by providing you
with all of the foundry-speciﬁc process models and data that you
will need for circuit design. The PDK is provided in a ﬁle format
that is compatible with the design environment (e.g., IC design
ﬂow and tools) you are using.
Circuit Layout
The next step in the process is to perform circuit layout. Here,
the individual circuit components which you have chosen to
carry out each function in the system, are physically laid out
and the electrical connections of each component are decided.
Automated design-rule-driven and connectivity-driven layout
tools may be used judiciously, especially to take advantage of
direct ties to schematic and design-rule checking. Critical ana-
log blocks are generally manually routed using a full custom
approach to ensure that highly sensitive analog circuitry meets
speciﬁcations.
Parasitic Extraction
The next step in the design process is to extract parasitics. This
is a crucial step as high-speed requirements make RF circuits
extremely sensitive to the effects of parasitics, including para-
sitic inductance, passive component modeling, as well as signal
integrity issues. Once extracted, these effects are added to the
circuit simulations.
For sensitive blocks like VCOs and critical radio blocks,
full-wave three-dimensional electromagnetic (EM) simulation
allows the extraction of the full layout at the block level. This
rigorous method simulates all high-frequency layout effects
including on-chip inductors, interconnect, coupling between
on-chip passives and to other interconnect structures, and sub-
strate coupling. No assumptions are made regarding parasitics
or coupling. The resulting accurate models of these effects are
used to replace the models that were created earlier in the design
process.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
FIG. 9-8.
The Eldo RF simulator from Mentor Graphics provides a set of dedicated algorithms to accurately and efﬁciently handle the multi-GHz signals in
modern wireless communication applications. It features steady-state analysis of RFIC circuits excited with periodic (single-tone) or quasi-periodic
(multi-tone) sources as well as a complete RF toolbox, including Smith Chart diagrams, gain and stability circles, and minimum noise ﬁgure. Eldo RF is part
of the Mentor IC design ﬂow, which includes Design Architect IC and IC Station for front-end and back-end analog and mixed-signal design.
Note that net-based RLC extractors also have their place in the
RFIC ﬂow, but they require designer input to manage which
parasitic effects to include in the extraction. Unfortunately, it
is not always clear which parasitic effects are most critical in
the circuit context. Rigorous EM extraction of the entire block
should be used to remove any doubt in the process.
Full-Chip Veriﬁcation
The ﬁnal step in the design process, prior to tape-out or addi-
tional chip integration, is to perform full-chip veriﬁcation in a
system (e.g., behavioral) testbench. The veriﬁcation can include
transistor-level circuits for multiple circuit blocks with incor-
poration of all extracted parasitics. The system should allow
designers to select the particular level of abstraction for individ-
ual circuit blocks in order to make reasonable trade-offs between
accuracy and simulation run time.
RFIC DESIGN FLOW EXAMPLE
What follows is an example of a wireless RFIC ﬂow that is part of
the Cadence Design Systems RF Design Methodology Kit which
is based on the Advanced Custom Design Methodology (ACD).
Fig. 9-9 depicts the wireless RFIC ﬂow. In this ﬂow, the design
collateral from the system design process is used as the ﬁrst
and highest abstraction level. System-level descriptions form
the executable testbench for the top-level chip. Models of the
surrounding system are combined with a high-level model of
the chip, producing an executable speciﬁcation. System require-
ments serve as the ﬁrst speciﬁcation to drive the chip-level
requirements, and ultimately turn into repeatable testbenches
and regression simulations.
Onceahigh-levelexecutablespeciﬁcationisachieved, thedesign
process continues by identifying areas of concern in the design.
Plans are then developed for how each area of concern will be
veriﬁed. Theplansspecifyhowthetestsarepreformedandwhich
blocks are at the transistor level during the test. Resist the temp-
tation to specify and write models that are more complicated than
necessary. Start with simple models and only model additional
effects as needed.
HDL Multi-Level Simulation
This process starts with HDL modeling (including all RF blocks
and any analog content and/or digital blocks) for the entire RFIC
being added to the system-level testbench. First a behavioral
model of the full chip within a top-level testbench is created. Ini-
tially it is used to verify the partitioning, block functionality and
ideal performance characteristics of the IC. Then, it serves as the
basis to facilitate mixed-level simulations, where blocks can be
inserted at the transistor level and veriﬁed in a top-level context.
This behavioral model/testbench also serves as the regression
template, allowing for continuous veriﬁcation as blocks mature.
In the full simulation environment, several views of the same
circuit will exist including, for example, a behavioral view, a

--- PAGE BREAK ---

RFIC Design Flow Example
HDL mixed-level siumulation
Mixed-level partitioning
Circuit design
Calibrated HDL models
Circuit simulation
Time
domain
Layout
Signoff net extraction
Frequency
domain
Electromagnetic
simulation
Spiral inductor
Synthesis/modeling
System
environment(s)
FIG. 9-9.
Wireless RFIC ﬂow utilized as part of the Cadence Design Systems RF Design Methodology Kit.
pre-layout transistor-level view, and several views of parasitic
information. As blocks mature, it may be necessary to add more
transistor-level information to test RF/analog and RF/digital
interfaces. This will require the use of a mixed-signal simulator
capable of handling analog, digital, and RF descriptions and
mixed behavioral-level with transistor-level abstractions. You
will need to pick the appropriate views of each block and manage
the runtime versus accuracy tradeoffs through simulation options
by—as an example—sending the transistors to a FastSPICE
simulator or keeping the transistors in a full SPICE mode.
Block Circuit Design
During this stage a preliminary circuit design is created that
allows for early circuit exploration and a ﬁrst-cut look at perfor-
mance speciﬁcations. This early exploration leads to a top-level
ﬂoorplan, which for RFIC is sensitive to noise concerns and
block-level interconnect. Passive components (e.g., spiral induc-
tors) are then synthesized and an initial placement of them on
the chip is completed.
Note that this approach enables two key activities: creating early
models for spiral inductors that can be used in simulation before
the block-level layouts are complete, and allowing for an initial
analysis of mutual inductance between the spirals.
Next, simulation is performed. A single PDK and associated
environment allows for a smooth determination and selection of
the simulation algorithm desired. Results are displayed through
an appropriate display for the simulation type selected. As cir-
cuits are completed at block level, they are veriﬁed within the
top-level context with behavioral stimulus and descriptions for
the surrounding chip.
Physical Implementation
Layout automation (e.g., automated routing, connectivity-driven
layout, design-rule-driven layout, and placement) is used to
implement the circuit. Analog-capable routers can help with
differential pairs and shielding wires, and allow for manual con-
straints per line. Highly sensitive circuitry requires a manual
approach.
Parasitic Extraction
Once the layout is complete, EM simulation is used to pro-
vide highly accurate models for passive components. Net-based
parasitic extraction becomes a key element of the process as
layouts emerge. Less sensitive interconnects may require RC
only, whereas more sensitive lines may require RLC. For lines
with spirals attached, these can be extracted fully with RLC plus
the associated inductor component, even with substrate effects
added for those lines that are the most sensitive. Lines that con-
tain a “full” extraction can be mixed and matched with the com-
ponent models for passive components that were created earlier.
Also during this stage, designers will check to see whether noisy
circuits (such as digital logic and perhaps PLLs) are affecting
the highly sensitive RF circuits. If so, they can either modify
the ﬂoorplan accordingly or add guardbands around the noisy
circuitry.
Note that it is often impractical to both simulate the entire
design at transistor level and include all the parasitic informa-
tion. One approach is to extract calibrated behavioral models
using the extracted view of the design blocks. This will not cap-
ture the effects of the parasitics on interconnect between blocks;
therefore, hierarchical extraction capabilities that extract only
parasitics of interconnect between design blocks is required.
Calibrated Models
As blocks are completed, the initial behavioral models can be
backannotatedforkeycircuitperformanceparameterstoprovide
more accurate HDL-level simulation. Veriﬁcation of a block by
mixed-level simulation, therefore, becomes a three-step process.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
First, the proposed block functionality is veriﬁed by including
an idealized model of the block in system-level simulations.
Next, the functionality of the block as implemented is veriﬁed
by replacing the idealized model with the netlist of the block.
Finally, the netlist of the block is replaced by an extracted model.
By comparing the results achieved from simulations that involve
the netlist and extracted models, the functionality and accuracy
of the extracted model can be veriﬁed. From then on, mixed-
level simulations of other blocks are made more representative
by using the veriﬁed extracted model of the block rather than the
idealized model.
SIMULATION EXAMPLE 1
To better understand how to verify that the blocks in an RFIC
(e.g., ampliﬁers, mixers, frequency dividers, and baseband
chain) are wired together correctly, consider the example of a
receiver with a wireless local area network (WLAN) 802.11b
signal as shown in Fig. 9-10. This example utilizes the RF Design
Environment (RFDE) from Agilent Technologies.
For this example, the direct-conversion receiver consists of
an LNA, I and Q mixers and baseband receive chains, and a
frequency divider to generate quadrature LO signals. In this
example, the task is to supply a WLAN 802.11b input signal to
the LNA, and verify that the I and Q baseband output signals still
FIG. 9-10.
This schematic, as viewed using Agilent Technologies’ RFDE software design platform for large-scale RF/mixed-signal IC design, shows a
direct-conversion receiver.
track the input modulation, at various points along the baseband
chain (outputs from the mixers, outputs from the DC offset can-
cellation circuit, outputs from the VGAs and from the tunable
ﬁlters).
The simulation uses time-domain baseband data sources that
are the I and Q data of a WLAN 802.11b signal. These data
sources modulate a sinusoid via an ideal modulator to generate
the test signal at the input. If you have the I and Q time-domain
data waveforms for some other modulation format, you may
use this technique along with the Cadence Envelope Follower
simulator or the Agilent Circuit Envelope simulator to generate
a modulated test signal.
The simulation time required depends linearly on the desired
stop time, with about 10 minutes being the minimum to get
useful information. The circuit has 2547 devices, 1377 of which
are nonlinear.
The data display in Fig. 9-11 shows comparisons between the
input signal and the signals at various points in the receive chain.
By changing theVtest equation, you can select the test point to be
the output of the mixer, the output of the DC offset cancellation
circuit, the output of the ﬁrst variable gain ampliﬁer, or the output
ofthebasebandﬁlter. Theplotscomparethespectra, magnitudes,
phases, real and imaginary parts, and the trajectories of the input
and Vtest signals.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Simulation Example 2
FIG. 9-11.
Data display of a simulated WLAN 802.11b signal obtained using Agilent’s RFDE software design platform. Note that the data display also
calculates the “generic” EVM, which is the result of including every time point (not just the symbol samples) in the EVM calculation. This data may also be
displayed as part of the Cadence simulation environment.
By changing the Vtest equation, you can see if there is a block
in the receiver chain that signiﬁcantly degrades the EVM. Also,
you can make changes to various blocks to see if the EVM can
be improved.
A good strategy for minimizing BER is to ﬁrst run relatively
quick simulations like this to test the EVM. When the EVM is
minimized, the BER should be minimized as well, and these
EVM simulations are much faster than simulating BER. Using
this type of simulation, you can easily see whether your receiver
or transmitter is wired up correctly and which block is causing
degradation.
SIMULATION EXAMPLE 2
The high-frequency nature of RFIC circuits makes them espe-
cially vulnerable to circuit impairments like compression, noise,
distortion and phase noise, as well as physical parasitics that
include interconnect impedance and coupling. In order to handle
these issues properly, you will require a simulator with the abil-
ity to simulate large circuits with extracted parasitics and high
nonlinear designs. It should be capable of simulating signals at
whatever frequency you want and running EM simulations on
arbitrary layout structures, which is more accurate than using
analytical models. It should also be able to run simulations
that include post-layout extractions. Any limitation on the type,
range, or capacity of simulation tools can impose major limits
on accuracy, ﬂexibility and design exploration.
As an example of the ﬂexibility required for RFIC simulation,
consider Fig. 9-12. The graphic depicts the spectrum for a direct
downconversion of either a direct-conversion receiver or trans-
mitter. Two input signals are shown near the local oscillator
(LO) frequency, with downconversion to baseband terms at the
output. The simulation can be run using either the Agilent Har-
monic Balance or Circuit Envelope simulators available from
either Cadence or Agilent via the Cadence SpectreRF or Agilent
Advanced Design System (ADS) solutions. Both Cadence and
Agilent provide these solutions.
Using the Harmonic Balance solution, this simulation would
require three large-signal tones, one for the LO and one for each
RF signal. A two-tone simulation can also be used if the fre-
quency difference between Flo and Frf1 is an integer multiple of
the frequency difference between Frf1 and Frf2.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
With Circuit Envelope, only one large signal tone, for the LO,
is required. Circuit Envelope simulation is a hybrid time- and
frequency-domain simulation technique. Signals that are within
the envelope bandwidth that is centered on each large-signal
analysis tone are generated without requiring any additional
large-signal analysis tones. The envelope bandwidth is equal to
1/(simulation time step). Tones that are within 0.5/(simulation
time step) above 0 Hz are also generated.
The large-signal analysis frequencies in this Circuit Envelope
simulation are the LO frequency and its harmonics. The LO
Frf2-Frf1
Flo-Frf2
Flo-Frf1
Baseband
Envelope
Baseband
centered
on Flo
FrF1 FrF2
1/(time step)
0.5/(time step)
FIG. 9-12.
Spectrum for a direct downconversion.
FIG. 9-13.
Shown here are the results of simulating a downconverting mixer using the Circuit Envelope simulator as part of Agilent’s Advanced Design
System (ADS)/RFDE. The RF tones are at 2.44875 and 2.44900 GHz, while the LO is at 2.45 GHz. The simulation required about 4.5 minutes.
signal can be generated by an oscillator and/or a frequency
divider, in which case its frequency is determined automati-
cally by the simulator while solving the oscillator and frequency
divider.
Fig. 9-13 displays the Circuit Envelope simulation results. The
equations show how a particular spectral tone can be plotted as
a function of the input signal amplitude. The design variables
Flo, Frf1, and Frf2 specify the spectral tone. The input signal
amplitude is VRFamp_dB.
Note that, in this example, the LO and its harmonics had to be
simulated along with baseband signals near DC due to the large
difference in signal frequencies. While a time-domain simula-
tor cannot simulate such circuits efﬁciently, frequency-domain
simulators like Harmonic Balance and Circuit Envelope are well
suited for circuits of this type.
MODELING
As opposed to system-level behavioral modeling,
which
describes what the system does, modeling of active and passive
on-chip elements during circuit design is done to improve the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Modeling
FIG. 9-14.
Spiral ﬁlters are complicated structures, with non-zero
thickness lines, underpasses, and more than one spiral metal layer
possible. Graphic courtesy of Applied Wave Research.
Measured Inductor Data
Inductor Model
PORT
P 1
Z 50 Ohm
PORT
P  2
Z  50 Ohm
PORT
P  3
Z  50 Ohm
PORT
P  4
Z  50 Ohm
FMRIND
IDMSP1
NS15
L180 um
L2155 um
L3165 um
LN35 um
AB0
W10 um
S5 um
WB10 um
HB 2 um
LB0 um
TB1 um
RhoB1
FIG. 9-15.
Inductor models can be quite sophisticated. This model for a
single layer spiral has thirteen physical parameters in order to match the
experimental data accurately. Graphic courtesy of Applied Wave
Research.
ﬁdelityofthesimulation. Especiallyproblematicistheprocessof
modeling spiral inductors on RFIC circuits, which are critical for
ﬁltering and tuning purposes (Fig. 9-14). When modeling these
elements it is vital that the Q of the inductor and the resonance
be predicted accurately. Because of their complex structures,
this is often an extremely difﬁcult, nontrivial task (Fig. 9-15).
Note that the Cadence SpectreRF Simulator includes a Vir-
tuoso Passive Component Modeler (VPCM) capability which
enables synthesis, veriﬁcation and modeling of spiral induc-
tors and transformers. It is a complete ﬂow, integrated in the
Virtuoso Schematic editor and layout suite, and is compati-
ble with Assura. It produces a complete PDK component with
schematic, symbol, pcell layout, S-parameter ﬁle and Spectre
models.
Note that a Foundry Design Kit (FDK) will provide many of
the passive models (e.g., metal-insulator-metal or metal-oxide-
metal capacitors) needed for designing RFICs. The RF Design
Methodology Kit from Cadence can be used to help generate
a design’s layout and an electrical model. As long as design rules
are followed and parameter ranges are not exceeded, these mod-
els are highly accurate. Because most foundries provide only
corner-case device models for device modeling, these models
may not be well suited for RF designs. Ideally, a model library
should include the following: corner cases, statistical models,
digital/analog mismatch models, pad models with RF electro-
static discharge, ﬂicker-noise models, and substrate-resistance
models. The library also should include well-proximity and
shallow trench isolation stress effects.
Modeling Issues
If a suitable FDK is not available, the task of creating the model
falls to the engineer. Some of the issues that will need to be
considered when developing a spiral inductor model are:
• The model must have some form of frequency-dependent
resistance to compensate for conductor losses.
Normally, spiral inductors are placed on the top layer
metal. The metal thickness and width are typically on
the order of a few microns in each dimension. At GHz
frequencies, these dimensions are on the order of a
skin depth for aluminum or copper, forcing the
current‘distribution in the conductors to change (e.g.,
crowding toward the surface of the line). This current
crowding increases the resistance in the inductor and
decreases the Q.
• Inductance effects must be considered.
Current crowding affects the inductance as a function
of frequency. As it occurs at higher frequencies, the
internal inductance will go down, as the current and
ﬂux are being excluded from the interior of the lines.
Therefore, there is a frequency dependent inductance
effect, which also affects the Q.
• Shielding can be used to isolate the inductor from the
substrate and minimize substrate effects.
The lossy substrate can contribute substantially to
reduction of the Q by providing a resistive loss
mechanism. Shielding placed below the inductor to
isolate it from the substrate can mitigate the
substrate’s effect on Q.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
• Make an assumption regarding location of the ground
return.
Inductance is only uniquely deﬁned when there is a
loop of current. Unfortunately, the modeler rarely has
the luxury of knowing exactly where the return current
is going to be. Therefore, certain assumptions will
have to be made regarding where the return current is,
e.g., on the substrate or on an intervening power plane.
• Capacitance can be difﬁcult to predict.
A multi-turn spiral has a large amount of capacitive
coupling to itself, which does not change much with
frequency. Charge will stay on the surface of a “good”
conductor. Aluminum, for example, is a good
conductor well past 100 GHz. However, it is often
difﬁcult to predict the capacitance, as the lines are
three-dimensional structures. This is where experience
and intuition can be important.
• Be careful when using the model in SPICE.
Resistance and inductance will change with frequency.
As a result, it may be tempting to make a model with
frequency-dependent resistance and inductance. When
the model is exported to SPICE, however, undesirable
behavior can occur. The response can become
completely nonphysical.
• Include underpass effect in the model.
The signal must be brought out from the center port of
the spiral inductor. Typically this is accomplished by
connecting to a line on a lower metal layer, creating an
underpass. It is important that the effect of the
underpass be included in the model.
Electromagnetic simulation software can be used to obtain simu-
lated data for inductor modeling and design. Several products are
commercially available that use a variety of methods. They range
from general-purpose simulators to those that are speciﬁcally
customized for spiral inductor modeling in RFICs.
PCB DESIGN
The printed circuit board (PCB) is used to mechanically support
and electrically connect electronic components using conductive
pathways, or traces, that are etched from copper sheets laminated
onto a nonconductive substrate. In high-volume production, the
PCB is inexpensive, rugged and reliable.
The Flow
AtypicalPCBfunctionaldesignﬂowisillustratedinFig. 9-16. In
the system speciﬁcation phase all design-speciﬁc requirements
are gathered and a speciﬁcation is created. Next, a schematic
representation of the speciﬁcation is created or captured, using
arangeofschematiccapturetools. Componentsfortheschematic
are chosen by the engineer based on a wide range of criteria,
which might include such things as price, support and availabil-
ity. A netlist is then automatically generated, which will serve as
input to the PCB Layout tool.
PCD Design Flow
System
Specification
Propose System
Architecture
Feasibility Simulation
Solution Space Simulations
Capture & Bind Constraints
HIgh-Speed PCB Layout
Verification
Fab & Assemble Prototype
Hardware Test & Verify
Manufacture
Product 8
System
Production
System
Test and
Verification
System
Implementation
FIG. 9-16.
Typical PCB design ﬂow.
Schematic capture tools allow you to take components from a
component library and place them on the schematic. You will
need to edit them as required to ensure that the component pack-
age details and silkscreen legend to be printed on the PCB are
as per requirements. If a component is not in the library, the
component is deﬁned and its deﬁnition and details are added to
the component library. Existing library components may also
need to be further edited to reﬂect the actual circuit diagram,
a step which requires that the pins of a particular component
have to be moved around as per desired circuit schematics. Once
all the parts have been placed on the schematics, the required
connections between pins of various components are drawn.
Next comes the PCB layout phase in which the schematic repre-
sentation is laid out via the use of a PCB layout design tool.
Considerations during this design phase include such things
as design for manufacturability (DFM), signal integrity and
EMI/EMC. These considerations will generally impose certain
restrictions on the PCB layout design and should be included
with your basic design rules (e.g., the rules that you follow for
layout pertaining to things like track width, track spacing, pad
sizes, via sizes, and routing types). Veriﬁcation that the layout
will provide the performance and function documented in the
speciﬁcation is then necessary.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

PCB Design
FIG. 9-17.
Modern auto routers, such as the RE AutoRouter option to Mentor Graphics’ Board Station RE PCB placement-and-routing environment,
mimic the manual strategies used by a designer.
During layout, components that form the schematic are taken
from the parts library or libraries and placed on the PCB layer.
This process is aided by the use of PCB placement and routing
(P&R) tools.All component placement constraints are taken into
account. For example, heat dissipation considerations may dic-
tate that some parts should be a certain minimum distance away
from others, while signals that need to be limited in length may
dictate close placement of certain parts that involve those signals.
Followingplacement, routingtakesplace. Traditionally, thispro-
cess would have involved a combination of both manual and
automatic routing techniques. Today, though, with 80–90% or
more of signals considered critical it is no longer feasible to man-
ually route critical nets. Instead, today’s auto routers are able to
route “correct by design” signals, following all the signal con-
straints for each signal. Modern auto routers also route signals
in a manufacturing-optimized manner so that manual cleanup is
not necessary (Fig. 9-17). While some engineers may choose to
spend time manually cleaning up their designs, this process is
just not “do-able” for very large designs, as it would take several
weeks.
After routing, the engineer must perform a DRC check, whereby
the PCB layout is tested against the netlist and the set of
previously speciﬁed design rules. Any violations reported are
corrected. After DRC, a ﬁnal layout cleanup is done.
Note that radio transmitters and radio receivers are especially
difﬁcult to design. PCB designers must therefore minimize par-
asitic effects due to layout of components, or take them into
account with a general model and use simulation software such
as SPICE. Fortunately, many practical circuits can be laid out
using a much simpler lumped element model.
At this stage, a ﬁnal veriﬁcation is done to ensure that the design
will perform as expected. If any error is found then the PCB
design process must be iterated (e.g., from design speciﬁcation,
layout, etc.) until such a time as the prototype passes veriﬁcation.
Once the design has been fully veriﬁed, it can be produced on a
volume scale for delivery to the customer.
If desired, the engineer can create a prototype for the purpose of
ﬁnal veriﬁcation, using the design ﬁles generated during PCB
layout (e.g., ODB++ formatted manufacturing data). More
often than not, though, it has become common to skip the proto-
type altogether. This process can be very time-consuming. More
importantly, today’s veriﬁcation tools now make it possible to
get the design right the ﬁrst time, without having to build a
prototype.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
PCB Design Tools
At every stage throughout this process, design tools can be used
to assist the RF engineer. These tools play a special role in
ensuring design success, especially given the high-frequency
circuit impairments in today’s complex analog and RFICs, such
as compression, noise, distortion and phase noise, as well as the
physical parasitics like interconnect impedance and coupling,
which make achieving design closure between RFIC’s system
and circuit, electrical and physical, and design and test activities
difﬁcult at best.
To aid RF designers, design tool vendors now offer not just point
tools, but PCB design ﬂows that are uniﬁed with both the IC and
package domains. This allows the RF engineer to perform early
analysis, I/O buffer planning, optimization and implementation
across all three implementation domains.
PACKAGING
A package is used to house the component, system or subsystem
being designed. RF packages are substantially different from
digital IC packages. They operate at much higher frequencies
and usually have far fewer I/O’s. Consequently, greater care must
be taken when doing the layout of individual signal interconnects
and transmission line junctions.
Additionally, in the GHz range, the effects of the physical
properties of interconnect on electrical signals (e.g., dispersion,
radiation losses, resonance and skin effects and even the sur-
face roughness of a conductor) can have a signiﬁcant impact on
RF performance. In fact, the electrical parasitics arising from
the packaged product have become such a key problem for chip
designers that it has now brought packaging into the spotlight as
a system-level concern. These effects, therefore, must be care-
fullyconsideredwhendesigningRFpackaging. Electromagnetic
modeling and three-dimensional EM models often play a critical
role in the RF package design process.
Options
There are a variety of packaging options and materials to choose
from. Which one you choose will depend in part on your end
application. For example, if the RF system in question is for a
wireless mobile product, then you will need to trade off your
packaging choices against customer-driven factors like cost,
performance and size.
Packaging options range from standard single-die packages to
System-in-Package (SiP). SiP technology builds on the inno-
vative array interconnect of ball grid array (BGA). It allows
multiple die with complementary device technologies to be com-
bined in a single package. Passive devices may also be included
in the package to deliver highly functional integration for digital
and radio frequency applications.
Another packaging option, RF Stacked Die System-in-Package,
is typically used in designs where the X-Y size constraint is
the critical requirement, such as for wireless communication
applications. It allows for the combination of die (e.g., 2 to 4
separate die) from different fabrication processes into a single
package. Board area savings are realized by stacking the die
vertically versus a side-by-side approach.
RF SiP is supported by design tools like the RF SiP Method-
ology Kit from Cadence Design Systems. The Kit accelerates
the application of advanced EDA technologies to SiP designs
for RF/wireless applications. It provides methodologies that
maximize design productivity and predictability for customers
leveraging the advantages of SiP implementation. An integrated
set of SiP design products, built around proven methodologies,
enables complete front-to-back SiP design and implementation,
which you can leverage for techniques and methods to apply
to your own design. The Kit is comprised of a complete doc-
umented step-by-step methodology and ﬂow for designing a
real, multi chip IC package. It includes all the design data,
ﬂow guides, and tutorials to jumpstart customers on a multi-chip
RF SiP Module design methodology, including package layout.
This methodology is also integrated with Cadence’s Virtuoso
environment.
RF packages can be designed in a wide range of materials (e.g.,
ceramics or advanced low dielectric materials). Two of the more
common options in use are ceramics and laminates.
Ceramics
Ceramics are inherently robust and allow for hermetic
packaging—a feature that makes them especially useful in appli-
cations requiring high reliability over a long period of time or
for those that will be used in hostile environments such as in
space or on the battleﬁeld. Because there is such a wide range of
ceramics technologies to choose from, the use of this material in
RF packaging is quite common today.
Fabrication process options include thin ﬁlm or thick ﬁlm. Thin
ﬁlm technology offers the smallest feature size and the highest
resolution. In contrast, thick ﬁlm technology allows the printing
of resistors and inductors directly onto the circuit. This tech-
nology is particularly useful in RF packaging where normal
lumped components can be difﬁcult to apply due to their inherent
parasitic properties.
Low temperature co-ﬁred ceramics (LTCC) is a multilayer
ceramic substrate technology. It is especially well suited for RF
applications and products where a high integration level and/or
high reliability is needed.
Ceramic material options range from a standard material like
high temperature co-ﬁred ceramic (HTCC) alumina to more spe-
cialized options, like aluminum nitride with its excellent thermal
properties or HiTCE ceramics, which have thermal expansion
coefﬁcients that are better matched to the expansion coefﬁcient
of PCB materials. Ceramic materials are also available with a
variety of electrical properties. Lower dielectric constant ceram-
ics, for example, allow for larger feature sizes and reduced
propagation delays.
Laminates
A laminate is a material that is made up of bonded layers. A
hybrid laminate is a PCB like structure, normally with a FR4

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Case Study
material core, that uses advanced materials on selected layers
in order to meet rigorous RF performance requirements. These
typesofpackagesubstratesareparticularlyusefulforRFsystems
where signals in the GHz frequency range may be routed on the
substrate surface between various active circuit elements. They
have become increasingly important in RF packaging due to their
low cost.
Design Solutions
Given the possible trade-offs and packaging options RF engi-
neers now have at their disposal, it is clear to see that designing
an RF package requires a broad knowledge of material proper-
ties and assembly processes, as well as a thorough understanding
of high-frequency signal behavior. Making the right choice can
either make or break the success of your product. Therefore, the
FIG. 9-18.
The 802.11a design ﬂow within the Analog Ofﬁce design
environment from Applied Ware Research.
FIG. 9-19.
The 802.11a transceiver system-level diagram with behavioral blocks representing major functions of the entire RF transceiver chain,
including the channel characteristics.
choice of packaging should never be an afterthought. You must
implement a packaging strategy during the design phase in order
to ensure that you will meet all your requirements for reliability,
manufacturability, RF performance, size and cost.
Various EDA tools are now available to help you design an RF
package. In addition to the EM modeling tools previously men-
tioned, there are also advanced packaging kits, such as the RF
SiP Methodology Kit from Cadence Design Systems, which
offer guidance on different design techniques (e.g., for SiP).
They cover RF components, together with packaging strategies,
to help you meet requirements for reliability, manufacturability,
RF performance, size and cost. Kits also explain design rules for
different types of packaging such as laminate and LTCC mod-
ules, as well as the trade-offs between them, and present working
guidelines for IC partitioning decisions early in the design phase.
CASE STUDY
Now that you have a better understanding of EDA tools, it is time
to take a closer look at how they can be utilized to streamline
the design process in the real world. The following case study
examines the design and analysis of an IEEE 802.11a (wireless
local area network) RF complementary metal-oxide semicon-
ductor (CMOS) transceiver using the Analog Ofﬁce software
solution and design ﬂow illustrated in Fig. 9-18. The design
employs a conventional conﬁguration widely used in the silicon
RFIC community and 0.18-μm CMOS technology from Taiwan
Semiconductor Manufacturing Company. Note that other design
tools—such as the Genesys software environment from Agilent
Technologies—may also be used for this design process.
System-Level Transceiver Design
The system-level diagram of the 802.11a transceiver, shown in
Fig. 9-19, is captured using pre-built behavioral blocks in the
Visual System Simulator (VSS) software. The design employs a

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
FIG. 9-20.
The NMOS transistor is characterized before use in the circuit to ensure accurate and adequate performance.
homodyne architecture, i.e., direct conversion of the RF signal
in 5.15 to 5.825 GHz band to baseband. The transceiver consists
of a baseband and RF circuits. The transmitter baseband circuits
includea64quadratureamplitudemodulation(QAM)modulator
and orthogonal frequency division multiplexing (OFDM) modu-
lator. Receiver baseband circuits include a 64 QAM demodulator
and OFDM demodulator. The transmitter RF circuits are com-
prised of up-converter mixers and power ampliﬁers, while the
receiver RF circuits include up-converter mixers and low-noise
receiver ampliﬁers. The local oscillator frequency is set to RF
frequency as per the homodyne architecture.
The goal of the system-level design is to determine RFIC
speciﬁcations from system-level speciﬁcations. During system
simulation, the noise ﬁgure and nonlinearity of the power ampli-
ﬁer (PA), LNA, and up- and down-converter mixers and phase
noise of the local oscillator (LO), are varied and system packet
error rate (PER) is monitored against speciﬁcations.
Prior to the start of the circuit design phase, the TSMC 0.18-μm
RF CMOS process is selected. A process design kit (PDK) is
then developed and installed within the Analog Ofﬁce design
environment.
Circuit-Level Receiver Design
The homodyne receiver portion of the IEEE 802.11a transceiver
consists of two main RF circuits: an LNA and a down-converter.
A modulated RF signal in the 5.150 to 5.825 GHz band is the
input to the LNA. The LNA must provide a sufﬁcient gain to
minimize the impact of mixer noise on the overall noise ﬁgure
of the receiver. A single-ended, 50 input source is assumed for
the LNA, which ampliﬁes the input signal by 20 dB, with a noise
ﬁgure of 1.2 dB.
The down-converter directly converts the ampliﬁed RF signal
to DC. It consists of two mixers with LO signals offset by 90◦
between the I and Q mixers. The mixer has a conversion gain of
6 dB, and noise ﬁgure of 5 dB.
LNA Design
The LNA selected is a differential cascode common source
ampliﬁer. Note that in this example, noise ﬁgure, power con-
sumption, input impedance, gain, and linearity are considered
together in designing the LNA.
Device Characterization
The design optimizes the noise ﬁgure of the LNA, while taking
power consumption into account. The optimum device width is
about 160 μm (NR = 64). DC and AC characteristics of a device
with a width of 160 μm are simulated, as shown in Fig. 9-20.
The DC simulation displays the drain current (Ids) with various
bias settings of drain to source voltage (Vds), and gate to source
voltage (Vgs) of the negative-channel metal-oxide semiconductor

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Case Study
FIG. 9-21.
LNA circuit design and analysis results including gain, noise ﬁgure, and stability.
(NMOS) device. A set-up for measuring Ids vs. Vds for various
settings of Vgs is also shown. A set-up for measuring Ids vs. Vgs
can be used to extract gm.
AC simulation displays fT andY- and S-parameters. A set-up for
measuring a gain of a transistor versus frequency can be used to
observe fT of the transistor at a particular bias setting as the gain
goes to 1. For the bias setting of interest, the fT of the device is
about 44 GHz. It is also used to monitor theY-parameters. A set-
up for measuring S-parameters of the transistor at a particular
bias setting is shown.
Circuit Design
Once the device characteristics are simulated, a bias current of
14 mA is selected for the differential pair, as shown in Fig. 9-21.
An estimated noise ﬁgure within the power constraint is about
1.5 to 1.9 dB. A noise simulation shows a noise ﬁgure of 1.2 dB
in the frequency range of 4 to 6 GHz and 1.1 dB at 5.2 GHz.
Next,
input impedance is matched to 100 differential
impedance. Since input impedance of an NMOS device is mostly
capacitive, a real term of the impedance must be provided. In
order to minimize the noise, an inductive source degeneration
method is used to present a real term in the frequency of interest.
The capacitive term of input impedance is “resonated out” by a
series inductor at the input. A high Q of the series inductor is
desirable to minimize the noise ﬁgure. S11 is −20 to −30 dB in
the frequency of interest.
Note that output impedance is not matched to 100 differen-
tial because the LNA is intended to be integrated with an I/Q
demodulator. An inductor is used as a load at the drain to pro-
vide more headroom, to resonate out the capacitance seen at the
output load, and to provide sufﬁcient gain. The Q of the load
inductors at the drain must be low enough to cover the entire
band of 5.15 to 5.85 GHz. The gain of the LNA is 20 dB over the
band of interest.
A stability factor, K, of the LNA is greater than 1 to ensure
the stability over the band of interest and other frequencies.
To prevent a negative resistance and thus avoid instability, it
is important that the differential pair not see a capacitance at the
source. In order to take advantage of automatic measurements
of impedance, S-parameter, gain, noise, 1-dB compression point
(and IP3), and intermodulation components, a balun is used to
convert the differential inputs of the LNA input single-ended.
The LNA circuit is duplicated with differential input signal
sources for different simulations. One circuit is used to simu-
late gain, noise, S11, and Zin, and stability factor K. Another
circuit with two tone frequencies and a power swept at the input
port is used to simulate input IP3 and 1-dB compression point.
The 1-dB compression point is −10 dBm and IP3 is >10 dBm.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
FIG. 9-22.
The down-converter mixer design circuit schematic with bias voltages annotated and several simulation results including isolation, conversion
loss vs. LO power and noise ﬁgure.
Another circuit with a single tone frequency and a power at the
input port is used to simulate the input and output voltages in
time domain.
Down-Converter Circuit Design
A down-converter consists of two mixers, converting from RF
to DC. Fig. 9-22 shows an example of an RF mixer design using
a Gilbert cell conﬁguration. One mixer circuit is used for the
simulation. The simulation shows a noise ﬁgure of only 5 dB,
so it may not be including all the noise sources. The bias and
the load resistor determine the conversion gain. The conversion
gain is about 6 dB as shown in S21 of a large signal S-parameter
simulation and noise gain simulation.
The source degeneration inductors at the source of the RF dif-
ferential pair improve the linearity of the mixer. The 1-dB
compression point is about −10 dBm of input power at the mixer
RF port.
The isolation of LO-IF ports and LO-RF ports is simulated by
mismatching the RF driver differential pair and LO switch-
ing pairs. The LO signal is monitored at the IF and RF
ports separately, using a large signal S-parameter (LSS) NM
measurement.
Another identical mixer circuit with a single RF input power
level is used to simulate the intermodulation components of the
mixer.
Transmitter Circuit Design
The direct conversion transmitter consists of two main RF
circuits: an up-converter and a PA. The PA in the design has
an output power of 40 mW and outputs a modulated RF signal
in the 5.18 to 5.26 GHz band.
Up-Converter Design
The up-converter consists of two double-balanced active mixers
for I and Q modulation. The lower differential pair takes base-
band signals and the upper switching pairs take differential local
oscillator signals tuned to the desired RF output signal. The local
oscillator frequency should be varied from 5.18 to 5.26 GHz. For
simulation purposes, the input center frequency is 50 MHz. If the
outputs of I and Q paths are summed, the lower sideband will
be selected as the output. If the outputs of I and Q paths are
subtracted, the upper sideband will be selected as the output.
The linearity requirement is set high to ensure no degradation of
linearity in the overall transmitter for OFDM and 64 QAM mod-
ulation. The 1-dB compression point is set 10 dB higher than

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Case Study
FIG. 9-23.
Up-converter mixer design and analysis results, including noise ﬁgure, conversion loss vs. LO power, and isolation.
the operating power level. For instance, the input 1-dB compres-
sion point is 8 dBm and the input power level in use is −2 dBm
or less. An RF system simulation using VSS software with a
behavioral model for up-converter showed 8 dB back-off from
the 1-dB compression point to guarantee no BER degradation,
assuming 4 to 5 dB back-off from the 1-dB compression point
for PA operation.
Mixer Design
The bias and size of the transistors are selected to provide the
necessary linearity and gain. The mixer has a conversion loss of
about 5 dB, as shown by the LSS21 measurement if the differen-
tial LO power level is 10 dBm. The noise ﬁgure is about 1.5 dB,
which means it is not simulating correctly. The large signal
impedance is monitored at the LO port for matching purposes.
It is important to provide a proper isolation between the LO and
the output port. The LSS measurement monitors the LO signal
level at the output port. The 1-dB compression point at the input
is 8 dBm as shown by sweeping the baseband input power as
the RF output is monitored. 8 dBm of a differential input power
is referenced to a 100 input impedance load. Since the input
of the up-converter is at baseband frequency, the input signal
should have an option to sweep voltages rather than power. Two-
tone simulations should show the intermodulation and harmonic
components. A two-tone harmonic balance source with a ﬁxed
or swept power is applied to the input port while the intermodu-
lation components are monitored at the output port. Small signal
impedance and S-parameters as well as large signal impedance
are monitored for the matching. Fig. 9-23 shows the various
measurements mentioned above.
PA Design
The PA has a single-ended, common-source conﬁguration with
two gain stages. The target frequency band is 5.18–5.26 GHz.
Although the average output power in this frequency band is
40 mW (16 dBm), OFDM and 64 QAM modulation signaling
raises the required output peak power to 21 dBm. An RF system
simulation using VSS software with a behavioral model for the
PA also shows that 21 dBm is the required 1-dB compression
point at the output. It is challenging to design a PA to deliver
the necessary output power with a required linearity in CMOS
technology at a low power supply voltage. Therefore, the bulk of
the effort in this design is focused on exploring the design space
to achieve optimum linearity.
PA Device Characterization
The output device size is selected by sweeping the current vs.
bias and device size, given the trade-off between power gain,
linearity and efﬁciency. Allowing for loss, the output power is
designed for 22 to 23 dBm. Although the output resistance of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
FIG. 9-24.
The PA design and analysis results, including gain vs. power, pout vs. pin, and load pull data contour.
22 is required to deliver 23 dBm with a 3V supply voltage, a
larger device of 960 μm/0.18 μm (thus smaller output resistance)
is selected to achieve a better linearity and power gain. The gate
is biased with a trade-off between the linearity and efﬁciency.
The emphasis, however, is placed on the linearity, and therefore,
it is biased as a class A ampliﬁer (with Vgs −Vth > 0.1V). The
device size of the ﬁrst stage is 480 μm/0.18 μm.
PA Circuit Design
Given the output power and linearity requirement, the transistors
are sized to provide the necessary load and gain. Each stage is
ﬁrst designed separately and then combined to resimulate the
overall performance. Since a PA operates at large input and out-
put levels, it is important to simulate it in a large signal domain.
For instance, gain contours with an optimal load can be dis-
played in a Smith Chart. In Fig. 9-24, four gain contours with
maximum incremental power gains of 20.8 dB and 0.1 dB are
displayed along with S11 and S22. The input and output match-
ing should maximize the gain. The contour plot shows that they
are optimally matched. S11 and S22 are better than −25 dB over
the frequency band of interest.
Prior to matching to 50 input and output ports, the circuit must
be stabilized. Since the input impedance of the circuit is negative,
a small inductor at the emitter to ground (simulating the bond
wire connection) should help without degrading the noise ﬁgure.
Additionally, a small resistor at the gate can provide stability over
a wider band. The K value is greater than 2 at the frequency band
of interest.
A proper matching of input and output delivers an optimal power
gain. A matching network consists of a DC blocking capacitor
to prevent the loading of circuits and an impedance transforma-
tion. A high pass L-match is used. The impedance at the input
and output is transformed up to 50. Since the input and output
impedance changes with the power level, the matching should
be monitored at a varying power level. The software displays
large-signal impedance (Z-comp) as the input power level is
swept.
The power-added efﬁciency is displayed by selecting “PAE”. It is
about 27% at the 1-dB compression point, as the PA is designed
for high linearity.
Since the linearity is critical, it is important to simulate a 1-dB
compression point and IM3 and IP3. The software simulates
them by applying a single-tone or two-tone harmonic balance
source. Two-tone harmonic balance simulation shows a large
signal S21 (LSS21) of 21 dB with an input 1-dB compression
point at 3 dBm (output at 22.6 dBm). The output IP3 is about
40 dBm and IM3 is about 33 dB down from the output power
level of 18 dBm. The 1-dB compression point at the output of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Summary
22.6 dBm allows for better than 6 dB of peak-to-average ratio.
The design target was 5 dB.
The resulting 802.11a RF CMOS transceiver is an optimum
design. TheLNAachievesadequategain, lownoise, andIP3, and
input match and stability are also adequate. The mixer achieves
adequate conversion gain and isolation, low noise ﬁgure,
and IP3.
SUMMARY
EDA solutions for the RF industry are certainly far from being
as mature and complete as those available to digital designers.
Nonetheless, they can be used to more accurately and quickly
design RFICs and PCBs. A number of design ﬂows and tools
now support these efforts, regardless of how simple or complex
the design may be.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

This page intentionally left blank 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A P P E N D I X A
and Antennas
WHAT IS RF?
F design is affected by residual circuit values, such
as additional capacitances and inductances, exhibited
even by transmission lines and circuit traces at high-
enough frequencies. These residual or “parasitic”
circuit elements can even be found in the structures
of transistors used for RF and microwave frequencies.
At lower frequencies, the physical wavelengths of signals are
very large so that the size of electrical components has little
impact on these signals. For example, the very-low-frequency
(VLF) range, which encompasses much of the human hearing
range of 20 Hz to 20 kHz, features signals with wavelengths as
long as 100 km (3 kHz). The high-frequency (HF) band, with
frequencies from 3 to 30 MHz and wavelengths from 100 to
10 m, has long been used for military tactical radios and for
amateur (“ham”) radio operators (the 30-m or 10-MHz range)
for the long-distance propagation properties of the waves.
Signals in the very-high-frequency (VHF) range of 30 to
300 MHz and the ultra-high-frequency (UHF) range of 300 MHz
to 3 GHz have long been used for television broadcast, although
in recent decades the 800- and 900-MHz bands are better known
for use by cellular and cordless telephones. As cellular tele-
phones have migrated to higher-frequency use in the bands
around 1900 through 2100 MHz, additional wireless applica-
tions have grown in spot frequencies such as 2450 MHz, such
as wireless local area networks (WLANs) and Bluetooth®. The
over-used frequency is also the designated frequency for indus-
trial heating and microwave ovens, since 2450 MHz is the water-
absorption frequency that results in heating of water-containing
materials.
Super-high frequencies (SHFs) from 3 to 30 GHz are generally
known as microwave frequencies, and extremely high frequen-
cies (EHFs) from 30 to 300 GHz are known as millimeter-
wave frequencies because of their small signal wavelengths.
Microwave frequencies at 12 and 18 GHz are commonly asso-
ciated with direct-broadcast-satellite (DBS) television applica-
tions and line-of-sight digital radios. The smaller wavelengths
of millimeter-wave signals make them well suited for radar
systems, especially within speciﬁc narrow operating-frequency
bands, such as 77 GHz, which is commonly used in automotive
collision-avoidance systems.
7.07
Origin
63.4
5  j5 (7.07 45
B 5 – j10 (11.18  63.4
Frequency Band
Range
Wavelengths
3 to 30 kHz
100 to 10 km
30 to 300 kHz
10 to 1 km
0.3 to 3 MHz
1 to 0.1 km
3 to 30 MHz
100 to 10 m
30 to 300 MHz
10 to 1 m
300 to 3000 MHz
100 to 10 cm
3 to 30 GHz
10 to 1 cm
30 to 300 GHz
10 to 1 mm
TABLE A1.
Frequencies and wavelengths
A Word about Antennas
Antennas make the work of the RF front end possible. Because
they are relatively simple structures with an entirely electromag-
netic (EM) behavior, antennas are among the most misunder-
stood component in the radio front end. In specifying antennas
for a radio front end, it is enough to know that the antenna must

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
be properly connected to the remainder of the RF front end by
means of an antenna coupling network. Also, the function of
that network differs depending on whether it is used with the
front end as a receiver or as a transmitter. When used with
the front-end receiver, the task of the antenna-coupling net-
work is to provide the highest sensitivity possible. To do this,
the network should achieve the lowest loss possible, since loss
translates into degraded noise ﬁgure. In some cases, the losses
of interconnecting cable must also be considered when judging
the effects of antenna matching to system receive sensitivity.
When used with the transmitter, the antenna coupling network
must produce the maximum radiated power from the associated
transmit electronics.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A P P E N D I X
VECTOR
Algebra
any of the design equations contained in earlier
chapters require that the user be familiar with
vector algebra. It is the intent of this appendix to
provide, for those who are unfamiliar with this
subject, aworkingknowledgeofvectoraddition,
subtraction, multiplication, and division.
As illustrated in Fig. B-1, a vector may be expressed in either
rectangular or polar form. In rectangular form, the vector quan-
tity is expressed as a sum of its coordinate parts. Thus, the vector
A shown in Fig. B-1 can be expressed as the sum of 5 units in
the x direction and 5 units in the y direction, or A = 5 + j5. That
same vector may be expressed in polar notation as a distance (R)
from the point of origin at an angle (θ) from the x axis. If vector
A were measured, its length would be found to be 7.07 units at
an angle of 45◦from the x axis. Thus,
A = 5 + j5
A = 7.07∠45◦
Similarly, vector B can be expressed in rectangular form as
5 −j10 or in polar form as 11.18 ∠−63.4◦. Note that negative
angles are measured clockwise from the x axis while positive
angles are measured counterclockwise.
Nf1   3 dB
Gain  7 dB
Nf2   7 dB
Gain  10 dB
Nf3   15 dB
Gain  10 dB
FIG. B-1.
Vector coordinates in rectangular and polar form.
2-Pole
Filter
3-Pole
Filter
Mixer
Insertion
Loss  6 dB
Insertion
Loss  10 dB
Conversion
Loss  7dB
NF  4 dB
NFp  3dB
G  10 bB
NFrcvr
NFpreamp
RECTANGULAR/POLAR AND POLAR/
RECTANGULAR CONVERSION
Rather than plotting a vector to graphically determine its com-
ponent parts, it is more convenient to perform a few simple
EXAMPLE B-1
The input impedance of a transistor is found to be
Z = 25 −j10 ohms. Express this impedance in polar
notation.
Solution
The magnitude of the resulting vector (R) is found as:
x2 + y2
625 + 100
= 26.9
The resulting angle from the x axis is found to be:
θ = arctan y
= arctan−10
= −21.8◦
Thus, Z = 25 −j10 ohms can also be expressed as
Z = 26.9 ∠−21.8◦ohms.
mathematical calculations. Any vector expressed in rectangu-
lar form may be converted to polar form (Example B-1) using
the following formulas:
x2 + y2
θ = arctan y
Theconversionfrompolartorectangularnotation(ExampleB-2)
can be made by using the following formulas:
x = R cos θ
y = R sin θ
VECTOR ADDITION
Two vector quantities can be added by performing two separate
additions—one for the respective x components and one for the
respective y components (Example B-3). Of course, the resultant
may be expressed in either rectangular or polar form.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
EXAMPLE B-2
The input impedance of a transistor is found to be
Z = 26.9 ∠−21.8◦. Express this impedance in rectangular
form.
Solution
First:
x = R cos θ
= 26.9 cos(−21.8◦)
= 26.9(0.9285)
= 25
and then:
y = R sin θ
= 26.9 sin(−21.8◦)
= 26.9(−0.3714)
= −10
Thus, Z = 25 −j10 ohms.
EXAMPLE B-3
An impedance of Z1 = 11.18 ∠63.40◦ohms is added in
series with an impedance of Z2 = 18.03 ∠−56.3◦ohms.
What is the resulting series impedance (ZT) expressed in
rectangular form?
Solution
Before the addition can be performed, the polar quantities
of the problem must be transformed to rectangular
notation. For Z1:
x1 = R1 cos θ1
= 11.18 cos(63.4◦)
y1 = R1 sin θ1
= 11.18 sin(63.4◦)
= 10
Thus,
Z1 = 5 + j10 ohms
For Z2:
x2 = R2 cos θ2
= 18.03 cos(−56.3◦)
= 10
EXAMPLE B-3 (Continued)
y2 = R2 sin θ2
= 18.03 sin(−56.3◦)
= −15
Thus, Z2 = 10 −j15 ohms.
To perform the addition, add the respective x components
and the respective y components.
xT = x1 + x2
= 5 + 10
= 15
yT = y1 + y2
= 10 −15
= −5
Thus, ZT = 15 −j5 ohms.
VECTOR SUBTRACTION
Vector subtraction is performed in a similar manner to that of
addition (Example B-4). The two vector quantities must ﬁrst
EXAMPLE B-4
Using the following values:
V1 = 11.18 ∠63.40◦
V2 = 18.03 ∠−56.3◦
Perform the calculation, VT = V1 −V2
Solution
Both quantities must ﬁrst be expressed in rectangular
form. For V 1:
x1 = R1 cos θ1
= 11.18 cos(63.4◦)
y1 = R1 sin θ1
= 11.18 sin(63.4◦)
= 10
and, then, for V 2:
x2 = R2 cos θ2
= 18.03 cos(−56.3◦)
= 10
Continued on next page

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Real, Imaginary, and Magnitude Components
EXAMPLE B-4—Cont
y2 = R2 sin θ2
= 18.03 sin(−56.3◦)
= −15
Subtracting the x and y components, we get:
xT = x1 −x2
= 5 −10
= −5
yT = y1 −y2
= 10 −(−15)
= 25
Therefore, V T = −5 + j25.
be expressed in rectangular form, and their respective x and y
components may then be subtracted.
VECTOR MULTPLICATION
Multiplication of two vectors is accomplished by ﬁrst converting
both vectors to polar form. The magnitudes (R) of the vectors are
then multiplied and their angles are added (Example B-5). Thus,
RT = R1R2
θT = θ1 + θ2
EXAMPLE B-5
For a transistor, S21 = 5.6∠60◦and S12 = 0.1∠30◦. Find
the product S21S12.
Solution
Both S parameters are already in polar form, therefore:
RT = R1R2
= (5.6)(0.1)
= 0.56
and,
θT = θ1 + θ2
= 60◦+ 30◦
= 90◦
Thus, the product S21S12 is equal to 0.56∠90◦.
VECTOR DIVISION
Vector division is performed by ﬁrst converting both vectors to
polar form. The vector quotient is then found by dividing the
magnitudes and subtracting the angles (Example B-6). Use the
formulas:
RT = R1
θT = θ1 −θ2
EXAMPLE B-6
Perform the following vector division:
VT = V1
where
V1 = 40∠60◦
V2 = 5 + j5
Solution
V1 is already in polar form. Convert V2 to polar form.
V2 = 7.071∠45◦
Divide the magnitudes.
RT = R1
7.071
= 5.66
Subtract the angles.
θT = θ1 −θ2
= 60◦−45◦
= 15◦
Therefore, the quotient is equal to 5.66∠15◦.
REAL, IMAGINARY, AND MAGNITUDE
COMPONENTS
Several references are made throughout the text to the “real part,”
the “imaginary part,” and the “magnitude” of a complex vector
(Example B-7). These components are described as follows:
When given the complex vector V, where
V = R∠θ
= x + jy
the real part of the vector V is given as:
Re(V) = x
the imaginary part of the vector V is given as:
Im(V) = jy
and the magnitude of the vector V is, then, given as:
|V| = R

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R F C I R C U I T D E S I G N
EXAMPLE B-7
Given the complex vector V = 10∠60◦, ﬁnd Re(V), Im(V),
and |V|.
Solution
First, express the vector in rectangular form.
x = R cos θ
= 10 cos(60◦)
y = R sin θ
= 10 sin(60◦)
= 8.66
Therefore, V = 5 + j8.66 and
Re(V) = 5
Im(V) = j8.66
|V| = 10

--- PAGE BREAK ---

BIBLIOGRAPHY
“2-3 GHz Broadband TRL Match.” SmithMatch User Manual. February 26, 2007, p 12.
Anderson, L. H., “How to Design Matching Networks,” Ham Radio, April 1978.
“Auriga: Modeling & Veriﬁcation.” [Online] Available http://www.ftlsystems.com/eda/Auriga/, March 23, 2007.
“Basic Smith Chart Principles/Techniques.” SmithMatch User Manual.. February 26, 2007. p 10.
Besser, L., “Take the Hassle Out of FET Amp Design,” MSN, September 1977.
Besser, L., “Update Ampliﬁer Design With Network Synthesis,” Microwaves, October 1977.
Bindra, Ashok. “Key Semiconductor Technology Trends to Watch.” RF Design. [Online] Available http://rfdesign.com/rﬁc/cmos_and_
compound_ics/semiconductor-technology-trends-0107, January 1, 2007.
“Bipolar junction transistor.” [Online] Available http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bipolar_junction_transistor, August 1, 2007.
“Bipolar Transistor.” [Online] Available http://searchsmb.techtarget.com/sDeﬁnition/0„sid44_gci211668,00.html, March 28, 2001.
Blyler, John, “RF Board Designers Confront Many Challenges,” Embedded Intel magazine, Spring 2007 [http://www.embeddedintel.com/
technology_applications.php?app=245]
Blyler, John E., “Wireless Networking: Overview and Roadmap”, IEEE Oregon Section (IEEE 802.11 Wireless LAN Technology), 2001.
Blyler, John, “Understanding Low-Power Designs,” Wireless Systems Design magazine, June 2001, Pp. 57–58.
Breed, Gary. “A Heritage of technology and Innovation: The History of Agilent EEsof EDA.” [Online] Available http://eesof.tm.agilent.com/pdf/
history_2001.pdf, 2001.
Brown, W. L., “Don’t Guess at Bias Circuit Design,” Electronic Design, May 9, 1968.
Browne, Jack, “ADCs Clear Way To Digital Receivers,” Microwave & RF magazine (www.mwrf.com).
Burwasser, A., “Wideband Monoﬁlar Autotransformers,” RF Design, January/February 1981.
Burwasser, A., “How to Design Broadband JFET Ampliﬁers to Provide Top Performance From VLF to Over 100 MHz,” Ham Radio, November
1979.
Byrne, Patrick J. “Innovation in Measurement: How the dynamics of the electronics industry are leading to measurement innovation.” Agilent
Measurement Journal. First quarter 2007, Pp. 9–10.
“C++.” [Online] Available http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/C%2B%2B, August 5, 2007.
“Cadence RF Design Methodology Kit.” [Online] Available http://cadence.com/products/kits/RF_Design/index.aspx, March 14, 2006.
“Cadence RF SIP Methodology Kit.” [Online] Available http://cadence.com/products/kits/rf_sip_methodology/index.aspx#, March 14, 2006.
Carlson, A., Communications Systems, McGraw-Hill, New York, NY, 1975.
Carson, R., High Frequency Ampliﬁers, John Wiley & Sons, New York, NY, 1975.
Chatterjee, Pallab. “ That 80’s Short or AMS IP Creation Flashback.” Wireless Chip Designer, [Online] Available, July 21, 2006.
Chern, Jue-Hsien. “Transitioning To A New Mixed-Signal Design Methodology.” Chip Design, [Online] Available, February 20, 2007.
Cohn, S. B., “Direct-Coupled-Resonator Filters,” Proceedings of the IRE, February 1957.
Cohn, S. B., “Dissipation Loss in Multiple-Coupled Resonator Filters,” Proceedings of the IRE, August 1959.
“dBw.” RFID Glossary. [Online] Available http://www.rﬁd4u.com/glossary.asp, February 25, 2007.
“Decibel.” Wikipedia. [Online] Available http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Decibel, August 2, 2007.
DeMaw, M. F., Practical RF Communications Data for Engineers and Technicians, Howard W. Sams & Co., Inc., Indianapolis, IN, 1978.
DeMaw, M. F., “The Practical Side of Toroids,” QST Magazine, June 1979.
DeMaw, M. F., “Magnetic Cores in RF Circuits,” RF Design, April 1980.
“Designing Impedance Matching Networks.” [Online] Available http://www.mathworks.com/applications/dsp_comm/demos.html?ﬁle=/products/
demos/shipping/rf/imped_match.html, May 3, 2007.
Dishal, M., “Exact Design and Analysis of Double and Triple Tuned Band-Pass Ampliﬁers,” Proceedings of the IRE, June 1947.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Bibliography
Dunn, John. “Spiral Inductor Modeling On RFICs.” March 2007, Pp. 1–7.
“Example: Efﬁciently Simulating a Direct-Conversion Receiver or Transmitter.” [Online] Available http://eesof.tm.agilent.com/products/
design_ﬂows/rﬁc/examples_05.html, March 21, 2007.
“Example: Veriﬁcation and Troubleshooting of a Receiver with a WLAN 802.11b Signal.” [Online]Available http://eesof.tm.agilent.com/products/
design_ﬂows/rﬁc/examples_01.html, March 21, 2007.
“Field-Effect Transistor.” [Online] Available http://searchsmb.techtarget.com/sDeﬁnition/0„sid44_gci213961,00.html, August 8, 2000.
“Field effect Transistor.” [Online] Available http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Field_effect_transistor, August 3, 2007.
Fink, D. G., Electronics Engineers’Handbook, McGraw-Hill, New York, NY, 1975.
Fisk, J., “How to Use the Smith Chart,” Ham Radio, March 1978.
Geffe, P., Simpliﬁed Modern Filter Design, John F. Rider, New York, NY, 1963.
“GENESYS.” [Online] Available http://www.eagleware.com/products/genesys/genesys.html, 2006.
Grammer, G., “Simpliﬁed Design of Impedance Matching Networks,” QST Magazine, March 1957.
Grossman, M., “Focus on Ferrite Materials: They Star as HF Magnetic Cores,” Electronic Design, April 30, 1981.
Gupta, S., Bayless, J., and Peikari, B., Circuit Analysis, Intext Educational Pub., Scranton, PA, 1972.
Hall, C., “RF Chokes, Their Performance Above and Below Resonance,” Ham Radio, June 1978.
Hardy, J., High Frequency Circuit Design, Reston Publishing Co., Inc., Reston, VA, 1979.
Harper, C. A., Handbook of Components for Electronics, McGraw-Hill, New York, NY.
Heimlich, Mike. “Challenges and Solutions: Module Design.” PowerPoint Presentation. May 4, 2007, Pp. 1–65.
Heimlich, Mike and Scott Wedge. “Meeting the Multi-Gbps Design Challenge with Signal Integrity Design.” PowerPoint Presentation. May 4,
2007, Pp. 1–28.
Hejhall, Roy, “Systemizing RF Power Ampliﬁer Design,” Motorola AN-282A, 1975.
Hejhall, Roy, “RF Small Signal Design Using Two-Port Parameters,” Motorola AN-215A, February 1977.
Hejhall, Roy, “Understanding Transistor Response Parameters,” Motorola AN-139A, 1974.
Hewlett-Packard Components, “Transistor Parameter Measurements,” Hewlett-Packard AN-77-1, February 1967.
Hewlett-Packard Components, “A Low Noise 4 GHz Transistor Ampliﬁer Using the HXTR-6101 Silicon Bipolar Transistor,” Hewlett-Packard
AN-967, May 1975.
Hewlett-Packard Components, “A 6 GHz Ampliﬁer Using the HFET-1101 GaAs FET,” Hewlett-Packard AN-970, February 1978.
Hewlett-Packard Components, “S-Parameter Techniques for Faster, More Accurate Network Design,” Hewlett-Packard AN-95-1.
Hewlett-Packard Components, “S-Parameter Design,” Hewlett-Packard AN-154, April 1972.
Hewlett-Packard Components, “Microwave Transistor Bias Considerations,” Hewlett-Packard AN-944-1, October 1973.
“High-pass ﬁlter.” Wikipedia [Online] Available http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/High-pass_ﬁlter, July 22, 2007.
Hoff, I. M., “Pi-Network Design for High-Frequency Power Ampliﬁers,” Ham Radio, June 1978.
Hooijmans, Pieter W. “RF Front End Application and Technology Trends.” Proceedings of Design Automation Conference, June 2–6, 2003,
Pp. 73–78.
Horvitz, Robert. “Frequency Conversion and New Technologies: Challenges and Opportunities in Spectrum Management,” Presented at the Center
for Strategic Research, Moscow, June 20, 2006.
Howe, H. Jr., “Basic Parameters Hold the Key to Microstrip-Ampliﬁer Design,” EDN, October 5, 1980.
“Impedance Matching and the Smith Chart: The Fundamentals.” [Online]Available http://www.maxim-ic.com/appnotes.cfm/appnote_number/742,
March 23, 2001.
“Introduction to the RF BS XE Flow.” RF in BSXE Flow User’s Manual, V8.13-1. Pp. 1–10.
Kaufman, M. and Seidman, A., Handbook of Electronics Calculations for Engineers and Technicians, McGraw-Hill, New York, NY, 1979.
Kraus, H. and Allen, C., “Designing Toroidal Transformers to Optimize Wideband Performance,” Electronics, August 16, 1973.
Krauss, H., Bostian, C., and Raak, F., Solid State Radio Engineering, John Wiley & Sons, New York, NY, 1980.
Lenk, J., Handbook of Simpliﬁed Solid State Circuit Design, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1971.
Litty, T. P., “Microstrip RF Ampliﬁer Design,” RF Design, January/February 1979.
Llamas, Ramon and Ryan Reith. “Converged Mobile Device Market SurgesAhead on 42% Growth in 2006, According to IDC.” [Online]Available
http://www.idc.com/getdoc.jsp?containerId=prUS20578607, February 26, 2007.
“Low Noise Amplifer Design with GENESYS.” May 22, 2007, Pp. 1–24.
“Low-pass ﬁlter.” Wikipedia. [Online] Available http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Low-pass_ﬁlter, August 2, 2007.
Miller, J., Solid State Communications: Design of Communications Equipment Using Semiconductors, McGraw-Hill, New York, NY, 1966.
Millman, J. and Halkias, C., Integrated Electronics: Analog Digital Circuits & Systems, McGraw-Hill, New York, NY, 1972.
Mini-Circuits, “Constant-Impedance IF Bandpass Filters Improve Circuits Performance,” www.minicircuits.com.
Motorola Semiconductor Products Inc., “Semiconductor Noise Figure Considerations,” Motorola AN-421, August 1976.
Myoung, Robert and Denis Soldo. “System in Package (SiP) and Stacked Package Solutions.” 2006 Worldwide Application Workshop, Pp. 1–11.
Nash, Eamon, “Measurement and Control of RF Power,” Analog Devices (www.analog.com).
Neilson, Dave and Tom Quan. “System/Circuit Design and Analysis of an IEEE 802.11a RF CMOS Transceiver.” Application Note, March 2007,
Pp. 1–10.
“ParkerVision: Our Story.” [Online] Available http://www.parkervision.com/about_us/our_story.php, February 20, 2007.
“PCB Design Process.” [Online] Available http://www.pcbdesignexpress.com/designprocesses.jsp, March 23, 2007.
Quan, Tom. “Design Suite Provides Advanced Technology for Analog and RFIC Design.” High Frequency Electronics. May, 2004, Pp. 50–55.
“Radio – History of Radio.” [Online] Available http://www.telecompie.com/radio/history.html, February 13, 2007.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Bibliography
Reference Data for Radio Engineers, Howard W. Sams & Co., Inc., Indianapolis, IN, 1975.
Rencher, Mark. “VHDL-AMS Extensions Enable RF Harmonic Balance Simulation.” High Frequency Electronics. March 2004, Pp. 44–47.
“RF Design Environment 2006.” [Online] Available http://eesof.tm.agilent.com/products/rfde2006_update1.html, March 16, 2007.
“RF Design Environment –Verilog-A Complier.” [Online]Available http://eesof.tm.agilent.com/products/rfde2003c_verilog.html, March 16, 2007.
“RF Design Methodology and Flow.” White Paper. 2006, Pp. 1–8.
“RF IC Flow.” [Online] Available http://cadence.com/whitepapers/rﬁc_ﬂow_wp.pdf, 2004, Pp. 1–7.
RF Packaging – Technical, [Online] Available http://www.kjas-interconnect.com/RFTechnical.html, 2002.
“RF Toolbox 2.1.” [Online] Available http://www.mathworks.com/products/rftoolbox/index.html, March 25, 2007.
“RLC Circuit.” Wikipedia [Online] Available http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/RLC_circuit, June 22, 2007.
Rousset, Jean, “From W-CDMA RF Front-End Speciﬁcations to Requirements,” consultant to Agilent Technologies (www.agilent.com).
Ruthroff, C., “Some Broadband Transformers,” Proceedings of the IRE, August 1959.
Sando, S., “Very Low-Noise GaAs FET Preamp for 432 MHz,” Ham Radio, April 1978.
Scherer, D., “Today’s Lesson–Learn About Low-Noise Design,” Microwaves, April 1979.
Sentz, R., Voltage and Power Ampliﬁers, Holt, Rinehart & Winston, Inc., New York, NY, 1968.
“SerDes Signal Integrity Design and Analysis.” Seminar. December 2006, Pp. 9–22, 30–31.
Sevick, J., “Broadband Matching Transformers Can Handle Many Kilowatts,” Electronics, November 25, 1976.
Shuch, Paul, “Solid State Microwave Ampliﬁer Design,” Ham Radio, October 1976.
Shulamn, J. M., “T-Network Impedance Matching to Coaxial Feedlines,” Ham Radio, September 1978.
Smith, P. H., Electronic Applications of the Smith Chart: In Waveguide, Circuit, & Component Analysis, McGraw-Hill, New York, NY, 1969.
Stickley, John and Wade Stone. “Combining the power of MATLAB for signal generation and analysis with an RTL representation in a high
performance emulator.” Chip Design, [Online] Available http://www.chipdesignmag.com/print.php?articleId=258?issueId=0, April 10, 2007.
“SystemVerilog.” [Online] Available http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SystemVerilog, July 21, 2007.
“SytemC: Deﬁnition and recommended Links.” [Online] Available http://www.eeglossary.com/systemc.htm, July 25, 2007.
“Transistors.” [Online] Available http://www.ic2forum.com/viewtopic.php?t=82, November 9, 2006.
Trout, B. “Small-Signal RF Design With Dual-Gate MOSFETs,” Motorola AN-478A, 1971.
“Using GENESYS with VNA Data for Matching.” Using GENESYS with a Vector Network Analyzer, May 15, 2007, Pp. 1–16.
“Verilog.” [Online] Available http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Verilog, August 3, 2007.
“Verilog-AMS.” [Online] Available http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Verilog-AMS, December 22, 2006.
“VHDL” [Online] Available http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/VHDL, August 2, 2007.
Viklund, Per. Personal Interview. March 7, 2007.
Wetherhold, E. E., “Design 7-Element Low-Pass Filters Using Standard Value Capacitors,” EDN, January 7, 1981.
Williams, A. B., Electronic Filter Design Handbook, McGraw-Hill, New York, NY, 1981.
Witzke, Edward, “AnApproachtoWirelessCommunicationsatSandiaNational,” SAND2002-3312, October2002[http://www.prod.sandia.gov/cgi-
bin/techlib/access-control.pl/2002/023312.pdf].
Yen, Albert. “Foundry Support Is Critical to SoC Design and Implementation.” Chip Design. [Online] Available http://www.chipdesignmag.com/
display.php?articleId=964&issueId=20, December 2006/January 2007.
Ziemer, R. E. and Tranter, W., Principles of Communications: Systems, Modulation & Noise, Houghton Mifﬂin Co., Boston, MA, 1976.
Zverev, A., Handbook of Filter Synthesis, John Wiley & Sons, New York, NY, 1967.
Zverev, A., “Introduction to Filters,” Electro-Technology, June 1964.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

This page intentionally left blank 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I N D E X
Absorption, 66, 67
AC resistance, 1, 5, 11
Active coupling, 32, 34–35
ADC’s effect, on front-end design, 197
Addition, vector, 229–230
Adjacent-channel power ratio (ACPR), 196
Admittance, 105, 109, 110, 122
conversion of impedance to, 75
load, 139–149
manipulation, 81–86
source, 139
Agilent Harmonic Balance, 213
Air core
inductor design, single-layer, 9–10
inductors, 10–11, 13
Algebra, vector, 229–232
Alumina substrate, 3–4
Aluminum, 1
AM detector receivers, 187–188
American Wire Gauge, 1, 9–10
Ampliﬁer(s)
and linearity, class-A, 169–175
class-B power, 175–176
class-C power, 176
driver, 178, 180
power, 178
small-signal RF, 125–164
RF power, 169–183
Antennas, 227–228
Area, cross-sectional, 1
Attenuation
characteristics, 37
ultimate, 24
Automatic gain control (AGC), 196
Automatic shutdown circuitry, 181
AWG, see American Wire Gauge
Balun, 181–182
Band-reject ﬁlters, 196
Band-rejection ﬁlter design, 60–61
Bandpass ﬁlter design, 57–61
Bandpass ﬁlters, 196
Bandstop ﬁlter, 37
Bandwidth, 23, 26, 28, 29, 35, 37, 58–59
Base spreading resistance, 104
Bell Laboratories, 72
Beryllia substrate, 3–4
Bessel
ﬁlters, 37–38, 40, 48–50, 61–62
response, 40, 48–50
Beta, 104, 115, 127
Bias
networks, 127, 128–130
transistor, 2
stability, 128, 129
Biasing, transistor, 127–130, 169–176
Biﬁlar-type windings, 182–183
Bipolar transistor, 128–129
Bit-error rate (BER), 195
Bonding wire, 104
Broadband transformers, 181–182, 183
Butterworth
ﬁlters, 37
response, 40–42
tables, 41, 42
C/C++, 205
Capacitance
collector-to-base, 115
distributed, 7, 10
emitter diffusion, 104
feedback, 104
interwinding, 9, 10, 20–21
parasitic, 3–4
Capacitive
coupling, 32–33
reactance, 5
Capacitor(s), 1, 2, 61, 75, 103–104
ceramic, 5–6
chip, 6
ﬂat ribbon, 6
metalized-ﬁlm, 7
mica, 6–7
NPO, 6–7
parallel-plate, 4
real-world, 4–5
temperature compensating, 6
types, 5–7

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Index
Carbon
composition resistors, 2, 3
granules, 2
Ceramic capacitors, 6
Ceramics, 218
Charge carriers, 1
Chebyshev
ﬁlter, 37, 40, 42–48, 53–55, 51–53, 62
polynomials, 44
response, 40, 42–48
Chip capacitors, 6
Circle(s)
constant
gain, 146–147
reactance, 74–75
resistance, 72, 74, 88
family of, 72–75
stability, 147–153
Circuit Envelope simulation, 214
Circuit Q, 67, 69, 86
Class
-A ampliﬁers and linearity, 169–175
-B power ampliﬁers, 175–176
-C power ampliﬁers, 176
of ampliﬁcation, 169
CMOS technology, 186
Coaxial feedlines, matching to, 180–181
Coil length, 9
Collector
load resistance, 178–180
-to-base capacitance, 115
Combiners, signal, 2
Common
-emitter
circuit, 104
current gain, 115
Complex
conjugate, 63–64, 67, 86, 90
impedances, 66
loads, dealing with, 66–67
Component(s), 1–21, 24, 86
Q, 28
real, imaginary, and magnitude, 231–232
Conductance, 81, 109, 130–131
Conduction angle, 174, 175, 176
Conductors, 1
Conjugate match, simultaneous, 107, 131–132, 142–143, 147
Conjugately matched, 130
Constant
dielectric, 4
gain circle, 146–147
resistance circles, 72, 74, 88
Conversion
formulas, 114
of impedance to admittance, 75–81
Copper, 1, 2
Core(s)
characteristics, 12–13
ferrite, 13
magnetic, 12, 13
powdered-iron, 13
Coulomb, 2, 4
Coupling
active, 32, 34–35
capacitive, 32–33
critical, 32
inductive, 32, 33–34
mutual, 32
of resonant circuits, 32–36
passive, 34–35
top-L, 34, 35
transformer, 32, 33, 34
transistor, 32, 34
Critical coupling, 32
Cross-sectional area, 1
Current
density, 1
gain, 128
common-emitter, 115
Cutoff frequency, 40, 41, 50, 61
Data sheets, 13–18, 103, 116–123, 140, 178
RF power transistor, 169
understanding RF transistor, 115, 122–123
beta, 115
current gain, 128
Dealing with complex loads, 66–67
Decibels, 24
Density
current, 1
ﬂux, 12, 19
magnetic ﬂux, 10–11
Design
for a speciﬁed gain, 147
for optimum noise ﬁgure, 152–153
using S parameters, 141–168
using Y parameters, 130–141
Design languages, 203
C/C++, 205
MATLAB, 205–207
RF toolbox, 207
Simulink, 207
SPICE, 207–208
SystemC, 205
SystemVerilog, 204
Verilog, 204
Verilog-A, 204
Verilog-AMS, 204
VHDL, 204
VHDL-AMS, 204
VHDL-AMS/FD, 205
VHDL-RF/MW, 205
Designing with potentially unstable transistors, 139–141
Dielectric
constant, 4, 6
materials, 4, 5
particulates, 2
Direct-conversion receiver, 189–190
Dissipation

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Index
factor, 4, 5
thermal, 2
Distortion, 174–175
Distributed capacitance, 7, 10
Division, vector, 231
Driver ampliﬁers, 177
Dual network, 57
Effective series resistance, 5
Effects of ﬁnite Q, 61–62
Electronic design automation (EDA), 203
Emitter diffusion capacitance, 104
Equivalent circuit, transistor, 104–109
External feedback, 108
Family of circles, 74–75
Feedback, 108, 130–131
capacitance, 104
characteristics, 107, 115
resistance, 104
Feedlines, matching to coaxial, 180–181
Ferrite, 9, 11, 13
cores, 13
toroidal cores, 183
FET, see ﬁeld-effect transistor
Field-effect transistor, 129
Filter
band-reject, 196
bandpass, 196
bandstop, 37
Bessel, 37, 40, 48, 50, 62
Butterworth, 37, 40–42, 62
Chebyshev, 37, 40, 42–48, 53–55, 51–53, 62
design, 37–62
band-rejection, 60–61
bandpass, 57–60
high-pass, 53–55
high-pass, 25, 53–55, 196
high-Q, 39, 42
low-pass, 37, 52, 57, 196
low-Q, 39
medium-Q, 40
response, 23–24
second-order, 38–39
third-order, 38
three-element, 38–39
two-pole, 38
types, 40–50, 62
Finite Q, effects of, 61–62
Fixed-chip inductors, 8
Flat ribbon capacitors, 6
Flux
density, 12, 19
linkage, 7, 9
Formulas, conversion, 114
Four-element ﬁlter, 41, 46
Frequencies, radio, 1, 2, 6, 23, 103
Frequency
and impedance scaling, 50–53
cutoff, 40, 41, 50, 61
response, 59
transition, 115
Front-end ampliﬁers
IP3, 195–196
Gain, 107–108, 125
bandwidth product, 115
characteristics, 103
current, 115
dc current, 128
design for a speciﬁed, 147
maximum available, 131
power, 115, 131, 178
transducer, 139
Gauge, American Wire, 1, 9
Gilbert-cell mixer, 192
Grid-leak detector, 189
Harmonic distortion, 174, 175
Heat energy, 2
High temperature co-ﬁred ceramics (HTCC), 218
High-pass
design, 53–56, 57
ﬁlter, 25, 196
High-Q ﬁlters, 39, 42, 50, 62
Hybrid-μ model, 104
Hysteresis, 13
IEEE 802.11a RF CMOS transceiver, case study, 219–225
Imaginary components, 231–232
Impedance(s), 2–3, 109
characteristics, 5, 8
complex, 66
large-signal, 169
load, 72, 86–88, 90
manipulation, 75
matching, 63–102, 125, 178, 180
on the Smith Chart, 86
scaling, 50–53
series, 81
source, 23, 72, 86–88, 90
to admittance, conversion of, 75–81
transformation, 29–32
values, plotting, 75
Incident wave, 114
Inductance, 1, 2, 19
Inductive
coupling, 32, 33–34
index, 19
Inductor(s), 1, 5, 7–11, 61, 75, 81, 104
air-core, 10–11, 13
design
single-layer air-core, 9–10
toroidal, 19–20
ﬁxed-chip, 8
lossless, 8, 9
magnetic core, 13
real-world, 7–9
toroidal, 11–12

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Index
Input
impedance, large-signal, 169
network design, 133, 144, 150, 162
resistance, 104, 105
Insertion loss, 24, 28–29, 37, 38, 39, 61
Insulation resistance, 5
Intermodulation distortion, 174
Interstage matching, 178–180
Interwinding capacitance, 9, 10, 20
IP3, 195–196
IRN-8, 19
K, see dielectric constant
L network, 64–66, 67, 69
Laminates, 218–219
Large-signal
impedance parameters, 183
input impedance, 169
output impedance, 169
Linearity, 174–175, 176
Linvill stability factor, 130, 132, 139–141
Load impedance(s), 23, 29–32, 63–64, 65, 72, 86–88, 111–112
Q, 37–38
reﬂection coefﬁcient, 142–143, 146
resistance, 26, 63
optimum collector, 178
Load(s)
admittance, 139
complex, 66–67
Loaded Q, 23, 26–28, 29–32, 34, 37–39, 86
Logic Synthesis tools, 203
Lossless
elements, 61
inductor, 9
Low-pass
ﬁlter, 25, 37, 38, 52, 58, 196
prototype, 39–40, 48, 50
Low-Q
ﬁlters, 39, 62
matching networks, 69–72
Low temperature co-ﬁred ceramics (LTCC), 218
MAG, 130–131, 139, 142, 147
see also maximum available gain
Magnetic
Core(s), 12, 13
inductors, 13
materials, 10–11
ﬁeld, 1
ﬂux density, 11
Matching
circuit, 64
networks, 69–72
to coaxial feedlines, 180–181
Materials, dielectric, 4, 5
MATLAB, 205–207
Maximum available gain, 131, 142
Medium-Q ﬁlter, 40, 50
Metal-ﬁlm resistors, 2, 3
Metalized-ﬁlm, 7
Mica capacitors, 6–7
Microwave Associates, 155–161
Miller effect, 105
Minimum detectable signal (MDS), 195
Modern communication receiver, case study, 197–201
Multichip module, 185
Multi-element matching, 88–90, 95
Multiplication, vector, 231
Negative positive zero, see NPO and temperature compensating
capacitor
Network
dual, 57
L, 64–66, 67, 69
tapped-L, 31
Neutralization, 140
Neutralized power gain, 108
Noise
and the low-pass prototype, 39–40
factor, 194, 195
ﬁgure, 115
design for optimum, 152–161
ﬂoor, 195
Normalization, 75
Normalized load impedance, 111
Output
impedance, large-signal, 169
network design, 134, 145, 149, 163
resistance, 104, 105–107, 178
Packaging
design solutions, 219
options, 218–219
Parallel
-plate capacitor, 4
resonant circuit, 23
Parameters
S, 110–114
two-port Y, 109–110
Y, 109–110, 114
Parasitic
capacitance, 3
reactance, 3
Passband, 23, 24, 26, 32, 38, 40, 42–44
Passive coupling, 34–35
Permeability, 11, 12, 13
Phase shift keying (PSK), 188
Pi network, 67–69, 70, 180
Place-and-Route (P&R) tools, 203
Plotting impedance values, 75
Polar
notation, 229
rectangular conversion, 229

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Index
Polynomials, Chebyshev, 44–45
Powdered iron, 13
cores, 13
materials, 19
Power
ampliﬁer(s)
class-B, 175–176
class-C, 176
design, 178
RF, 169–183
combiners, 182
factor, 5
gain, 107–108, 115, 131, 178
splitters, 182
transfer of, 63, 64
transistor
characteristics, RF, 169
data sheet, RF, 169
Practical winding hints, 20, 182–183
Printed circuit board (PCB) design
ﬂow, 216–217
tools, 218
Prototype, low-pass, 39–40, 48, 50–52
Q, 5, 9, 11, 13, 19, 20, 24, 86–88, 92
circuit, 67, 69
effects of ﬁnite, 61
Radiation resistance, 180
Radio frequencies, 1, 2, 6, 23
the transistor at, 103–123
Reactance(s), 63–64, 66, 75
capacitive, 5
circles, 74
parasitic, 3
Real
imaginary, and magnitude components, 231–232
-world inductors, 7–9
Receiver architectures
AM detector receivers, 187–188
direct-conversion receiver, 189–190
front-end ampliﬁers
IP3, 195–196
selectivity, 196–197
superheterodyne receivers
intermodulation and intercept points, 192
local oscillators, generation, 190–191
mixers, 191–192
preselection ﬁlters, 193–194
system sensitivity and noise, 194–195
TRF receiver, 189
Rectangular
notation, 229
polar conversion, 229
Reﬂected wave, 111
Reﬂection coefﬁcient, 72, 75, 111, 112, 114, 142–143
Resistance
ac, 1, 5, 11
base spreading, 104
circles, 74
effective series, 5–6
feedback, 104
input, 104, 105, 106
insulation, 5
load, 63
optimum collector load, 178
output, 104, 105, 107, 178–179
radiation, 180
source, 63
virtual, 67, 72
Resistor(s), 1, 2–3, 104
carbon-composition, 2, 3
equivalent circuit, 2–3
metal-ﬁlm, 3
thin-ﬁlm chip, 3
wirewound, 2–3
Resonance, 24–26, 37, 60, 64, 66
Resonant circuits, 23–36, 60
coupling of, 32–36
parallel, 23
Responses
Bessel, 40, 48, 50
Butterworth, 40–42
Chebyshev, 40, 42, 44–50
passband, 40, 42, 59
ampliﬁer design, small-signal, 125–168
and antennas, 227–228
circuit design, 37
design tools, 203–225
front-end design, 185–201
ADC’s effect on, 197
power
ampliﬁers, 169–183
transistor
characteristics, 169
data sheet, 169
spectrum, 1
transistor data sheets, understanding, 115–123
RF toolbox, 207
RFIC design ﬂow
block circuit design, 211
calibrated models, 211–212
circuit design, 209
circuit layout, 209
full-chip veriﬁcation, 210
HDL multi-level simulation, 210–211
parasitic extraction, 209–210, 211
physical implementation, 211
system design, 208–209
RICON Harmonic Balance simulator, 205
Ripple, 24, 38, 42–44, 52
Rollett stability factor, 142, 147, 161
S and Y parameters, 114, 122, 123, 183
S parameters, 103, 109–114
and the two-port network, 112–114
design using, 141–168

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Index
Scaling, 40
frequency and impedance, 50–53
Scattering parameters, 141–142
see also S parameters
Schematic Capture tools, 203
Second-order
distortion, 174–175
ﬁlter, 37, 39
intercept point, 175
Selectively mismatching, 140, 147
Selectivity, of receiver, 188, 196–197
Self-inductance, 1
Sensitivity, of receiver, 188, 194
Series
circuit, 65
impedance, 75–86
Shape factor, 24, 37
Shielding a transformer, 34
Shunt
component, 65
inductor, 86
Shutdown circuitry, automatic, 181
Signal
combiners, 2
-to-noise ratio, 188, 195
Signal in noise and distortion (SINAD), 195
Silver, 1
Simulation, 212–214
tools, 203
Simulink, 207
Simultaneous conjugate matching, 107, 131, 141, 147
Single-ended mixers, 191
Single-layer
air-core inductor design, 9–10
winding, 20
Skin
depth, 1, 2
effect, 1, 3, 9
Small-signal RF ampliﬁer design, 125–168
Smith, Phillip, 72
Smith Chart, 63, 72–86, 88–90, 105, 112–114, 147, 151–152, 169
construction, 72–75
impedance matching on, 86–90
Software deﬁned radio (SDR), 197
Source
admittance, 139
impedance, 23, 29, 63–64, 72, 86–88
reﬂection coefﬁcient, 147, 161
resistance, 24, 25, 26, 63
Spectrum, RF, 1
SPICE, 207–208
Spiral inductor modeling, 214–216
Spurious-free dynamic range (SFDR), 195
Stability
calculations, 130–131
circles, 147–152
factor
Linvill, 130, 132, 139, 141
Rollett, 142, 147, 161
Stern, 131, 140
Stern stability factor, 131, 140
Straight-wire inductors, 1–2
Subtraction, vector, 230
Superheterodyne receivers
intermodulation and intercept points, 192–193
local oscillators, generation, 190–191
mixers, 191–192
preselection ﬁlters, 193–194
system sensitivity and noise, 194–195
Susceptance, 81, 90, 190
SystemC, 205
System-in-package (SiP), 185, 218
SystemVerilog, 204
T network, 69, 71, 180
Tapped
-C transformer, 31, 36
-L network, 31
Temperature
characteristics, 6
coefﬁcient, 6
compensating capacitors, 6
Thermal
dissipation, 2
noise, 188, 194, 195
Thin-ﬁlm chip resistors, 3
Third-order
distortion, 174–175
ﬁlter, 37
Three-element
ﬁlter, 38, 39
matching, 67–69
network, 67
Top-L coupling, 34, 35
Toroidal
cores, ferrite, 183
inductor design, 19–20
inductors, 11–12
Toroids, 11–13
Transducer gain, 139, 146
Transfer of power, 63, 64
Transformer(s)
broadband, 181–182, 183
coupling, 32, 33, 34
impedance, 30
shielding a, 34
tapped-C, 31, 36
transmission-line, 182–183
Transistor(s)
as a two-port network, 109–110
at radio frequencies, 103–123
bias networks, 2
biasing, 127–130, 169–176
bipolar, 125, 128
characteristics, RF power, 169
data sheet(s)
RF power, 169
understanding, 115–123
designing with potentially unstable, 139–141
equivalent circuit, 104–108
ﬁeld-effect, 125, 129

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Index
Transition frequency, 115
Transmission
line
theory, 111–112
transformers, 182
loss, 75
Traveling wave, 112
TRF receiver, 189
Triﬁlar-type windings, 182
Tuned-radio-frequency receiver, see TRF receiver
Twisted-pair winding, 183
-element
ﬁlter, 38
L networks, 67, 69
matching, 86
-pole ﬁlter, 38
-port
device, 112–114
network, 152–153
S parameters and, 112–114
transistor as, 109–110
Y parameters, 110
Ultimate attenuation, 24
Unconditionally stable transistors, 131, 140, 142–143, 151
Understanding RF transistor data sheets, 115–123
Unilateralization, 140
Unilateralized power gain, 108
Unneutralized power gain, 108
Unstable transistors, designing with potentially, 139–141
Vector
addition, 229
algebra, 229–232
division, 231
multiplication, 231
subtraction, 230–231
Veriﬁcation tools, 203
Verilog, 204
Verilog-A, 204
Verilog-AMS, 204
VHDL, 204
VHDL-AMS, 204
VHDL-AMS/FD, 205
VHDL-RF/MW, 205
Virtual resistance, 68, 69
Virtuoso Passive Component Modeler (VPCM), 215
Voltage standing wave ratio (VSWR), 75, 181
Wideband matching networks, 69–72
Winding hints, practical, 182–183
Wire, 1–2, 20, 104
gauges, 1
size, 9, 10
Wirewound resistors, 2–4
Y and S parameters, 122, 123, 127, 183
Y parameters, 103, 109–110, 122, 131, 142
design using, 130–141
two-port, 110