Chapter 2 
Core concepts of microwave and RF measurements  
2.1 Introduction 
In this chapter we review the core concepts of microwave and radio frequency (RF) 
propagation in both guided-wave and on-wafer environments. Because most of these 
concepts are well-known, we will introduce only the terms and definitions that are 
necessary for the development and description of the material used throughout this 
book. For many, this chapter will serve as a whirlwind tour of familiar concepts. 
Readers interested in further details will find them in the referenced literature.  
Guided waves are often discussed exclusively in terms of transmission line theory.  
Here, our approach will begin with Maxwell’s equations, from which we will then 
transition to the transmission line approach. Readers who do not require a review of 
the fundamental physics of guided electromagnetic waves may wish to skip directly to 
Section 2.3, which provides an overview of transmission line theory. Building upon 
transmission line theory, we define the impedance, admittance and scattering 
parameter matrices. Then, after a brief discussion of signal flow graphs, we discuss 
calibration and de-embedding. From there, the calibration approach is extended to 
multimode propagation. Finally, we introduce one-port calibration of scanning 
microwave microscopes. 
2.2 Maxwell’s equations 
2.2.1 Macroscopic equations 
Without derivation, we define Maxwell’s equations as follows: 
 𝛁 × 𝐄 = −
(2.1) 
𝛁 × 𝑯= 𝑱+
(2.2) 
𝛁∙ 𝑫=  
(2.3) 
𝛁 ∙𝑩= 0 
(2.4) 
where E and H are the electric and magnetic field vectors, respectively. B and D are 
the magnetic induction and electric displacement vectors, respectively. J is a vector 
that represents the induced and enforced current densities and  is the charge density. 
E, H, B, D, J and  are functions of position r = (x,y,z) and time t [1]. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Maxwell’s equations are complemented by the general electromagnetic materials 
equations:   
𝑩= [] ∙𝑯  
(2.5) 
𝑫= [] ∙𝑯  
(2.6) 
𝑱= [] ∙(𝑬+ 𝑬𝒆𝒏𝒇)  
(2.7) 
where [] , [], []  are the permeability, permittivity and conductivity tensors, 
respectively. For isotropic media, these tensors are reduced to scalar quantities. Here, 
we will discuss propagation of electromagnetic waves only in media that are linear, 
isotropic and passive, unless otherwise specified. In addition to Maxwell’s equations, 
one must enforce the continuity equation 
𝜕𝑡+ ∇∙𝑱= 0  
(2.8) 
Finally, the particular solution of a given electromagnetic problem will depend on the 
boundary conditions at the interface between two different materials, denoted below 
by subscripts 1 and 2. For tangential components of electric and magnetic fields [1]  
𝐸𝑡1 = 𝐸𝑡2 
(2.9a) 
𝐻𝑡1 = 𝐻𝑡2 + 𝐾𝑠  
(2.9b) 
where 𝐾𝑠 is the surface current density in A/m. For the normal components of the 
displacement and magnetic induction  
𝐵𝑛1 = 𝐵𝑛2 
(2.10a) 
𝐷𝑛1 = 𝐷𝑛2 −𝜌𝑠 
(2.10b) 
where 𝜌𝑠 is surface charge density in C/m2. 
2.2.2 Vector and scalar potentials 
To gain physical insight into the meaning of Maxwell’s equation within a material, it 
is necessary to introduce the polarization vector P and magnetization vector M as [2] 
𝑫= ε0𝑬+ 𝑷   
(2.11) 
 𝑩= 𝜇0(𝑯+ 𝑴) 
(2.12) 
Then the Equations (2.2) and (2.3) can be rewritten in the form:  

--- PAGE BREAK ---

𝛁 × 𝑩= 𝜇 0𝑱+
𝜕𝑡+ 𝜇0𝛁× 𝑴+ 𝜇0
(2.13) 
𝛁∙ 𝑬=
𝜀0 (+ ∇∙𝑷)  
(2.14) 
where c is speed of light in vacuum, ε0 is the permittivity of free space, and μ0 is the 
permeability of free space. Equations (2.1) and (2.4) retain their form. The material-
related terms in Equation (2.13) represent the effective currents due to presence of the 
material and in Equation (2.14) the bound charge due to presence of the material. We 
will discuss polarization and magnetization vectors and their relation to microscopic 
material parameters in Chapter 9.  
From Equation (2.4), it follows that the magnetic field can be written in the form  
𝑩=  𝛁× 𝑨 
(2.15) 
The vector field A is known as the vector potential. Combining this definition with 
Equation (2.1), we can define a scalar quantity 𝜙 called the scalar potential such that 
the electric field can be expressed as 
𝑬= −
𝜕𝑡− ∇𝜙 
(2.16) 
Note that A and 𝜙 are both functions of r and t. This form of Maxwell’s equations is 
indispensable for describing nanoscale electromagnetic interactions with matter. The 
introduction of potentials in (2.15) and (2.16) does not uniquely determine A and 𝜙. By 
introducing the so called Lorentz gauge condition  
∇∙𝑨+
𝜕𝑡= 0 
(2.17) 
A and 𝜙 can be uniquely determined from 
(∇2 − 
𝜕𝑡2)𝑨= −𝜇0𝑱 
(2.18) 
(∇2 − 
𝜕𝑡2)𝜙= −
𝜀0 𝜌  
(2.19) 
The general solutions for the scalar and vector potentials in the Lorentz gauge have 
the following respective forms [3]-[5]: 
𝜑(𝒓, 𝑡) = [
4𝜋𝜀0 ∫
𝜌(𝒓′,𝑡−|𝒓−𝒓′|
|𝒓−𝒓′|
𝑑3𝒓′
(2.20) 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

𝑨(𝒓, 𝑡) = [
𝑱(𝒓′,𝑡−|𝒓−𝒓′|
|𝒓−𝒓′|
𝑑3𝒓′
(2.21) 
These potentials are sometimes referred to as retarded potentials. Note the presence 
of the expression for the so-called retarded time, t - |r – r’|/c. Also note that the current 
densities and charge densities in these equations are assumed to contain all 
contributions including sources. We will return to this approach and its consequences 
when we discuss near-field interactions. 
2.2.3 Hertz vector potentials 
In order to solve Maxwell’s equations in guided waves systems, it is useful to introduce 
the Hertz potential 𝝅 that is related to the vector and scalar potentials through [6] 
𝑨(𝒓, 𝑡) = 𝜀𝜇
𝜕𝝅(𝒓,𝑡)
(2.22) 
Using the Lorentz gauge condition (2.17) 
𝜑(𝒓, 𝑡) = −∇∙𝝅 
(2.23) 
Note that if one can find an arbitrary solution for 𝝅, the electric and magnetic fields 
obtained from the Hertz vector fulfill all of Maxwell’s equations and therefore describe 
the solution of the problem.    
Inspection of Maxwell’s equations for guided waves propagating in the z direction 
reveals two special solutions: one when Ez = 0 and the other when Hz = 0, where Ez and 
Hz are the components of the electric and magnetic fields along the direction of 
propagation. The first of these solutions has the electric field perpendicular to the 
direction of propagation and is called the transverse electric (TE) mode. The latter of 
these solutions has the magnetic field perpendicular to the direction of propagation 
and is called the transverse magnetic (TM) mode. The solution for these two cases 
simplifies if we introduce special forms of Hertz vector potentials: the electric Hertz 
vector potential e and magnetic Hertz vector potential m. Below, we introduce 
formulas that correspond to propagation of guided waves in the positive z direction. 
For the propagation in the negative z direction they have to be modified appropriately 
[7]. The electric Hertz vector is defined such that: 
𝑬 =  𝛁 × 𝛁× 𝝅𝒆  
(2.24a) 
𝑯 = 𝜖
𝜕𝑡(𝛁 × 𝝅𝒆) 
(2.24b)  
The magnetic Hertz vector is defined as: 
𝑯 =  𝛁 × 𝛁× 𝝅𝒎 
(2.25a) 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

𝑬 = −
𝜕𝑡(𝛁 × 𝝅𝒎) . 
(2.25b)  
Both vectors satisfy the wave equation 
∇2𝝅𝒆,𝒎  − 
𝜕𝑡2 (𝝅𝒆,𝒎) = 0 . 
(2.26)  
When the time dependence of the electric and magnetic fields is harmonic, i.e. in the 
form exp(jt), one can replace 
𝝏𝒕  by 𝑗𝜔, where  is the radial frequency of the harmonic 
signal and 𝑗= √−1. 
The solution of (2.26), as mentioned above, defines all components of guided-wave 
electromagnetic fields through (2.24) and (2.25). The utility of the Hertz vector is 
demonstrated by the fact that one can easily obtain the transverse component of the 
magnetic field, the so-called TM field, from the component of the electric Hertz vector 
in the direction of propagation. In a similar way, one can easily obtain the transverse 
component of the electric field, the so-called TE field, from the magnetic Hertz vector. 
If the propagating electromagnetic field has both electric and magnetic field 
components in the plane perpendicular to the direction of propagation and these fields 
are a function of only one coordinate variable and time, then this field configuration is 
called a transverse electromagnetic or TEM wave. TEM waves play an important role 
in microwave engineering because the form of propagating TEM wave equations is 
similar to that transmission line equations, as will be shown below. 
2.2.4 Transition from fields to transmission lines 
Following the approach presented in [7], we transition from the electromagnetic field 
representation to the quasi-equivalent transmission line approach.  The transmission 
line model is widely used as it represents complex electromagnetic fields through 
conceptually simpler voltages and currents. Here, the case of TE waves is described in 
detail, but the approach is also valid for TM and TEM waves. 
Assuming the propagation direction is in the z direction for TE waves, the 𝝅𝒎 vector 
can be expressed as: 
𝝅𝒎= 𝑇𝑒(𝑥, 𝑦)𝐿(𝑧)𝒖𝑧,  
(2.27) 
where 𝒖𝑧 a unit vector in the z direction and the functions Te and L represent the 
transverse and longitudinal field components, respectively. Inserting (2.27) into (2.26) 
and separating the variables, we get two differential equations  
∇2𝑇𝑒(𝑥, 𝑦) + 𝐾2𝑇𝑒(𝑥, 𝑦) = 0 
(2.28a) 
𝑑2𝐿(𝑧)
𝑑𝑧2 + 𝛾2𝐿(𝑧) = 0 
(2.28b) 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

where 𝛾2 =  𝜀𝜇− 𝐾2 and K is the separation constant. The solution of (2.28b) is in the 
form 
𝐿(𝑧) = 𝐴𝑒−𝛾𝑧+ 𝐵𝑒𝛾𝑧,   
(2.29) 
which represents the wave propagation as a superposition of waves propagating in the 
positive and negative z directions. The propagation constant is a complex number,𝛾=
 𝛼+ 𝑗𝛽, where 𝛼 is the damping parameter and 𝛽 is a phase constant. One subsequently 
can introduce 𝜆𝑔 = 
𝛽 , the wavelength of the guided-wave mode. Both Equations 
(2.28a) and (2.28b) have to be solved as eigenvalue problems with corresponding 
boundary conditions. We are not going to address the mathematical solution of such 
eigenvalue problems here. In general, the solution of the boundary value problem for 
TE and TM modes leads to an infinite number of solutions for each of the modes. The 
existence of this set of solutions and the guided wave mode structure it represents are 
critical concepts for the understanding of guided waves.  
Now we define the circuit variables for voltage v and current i in terms of the guided-
wave electromagnetic fields. The transverse magnetic and electric components of are 
defined as  
𝑯𝒕= 𝑖𝒉𝟎  
(2.30a) 
𝑬𝒕= 𝑣𝒆𝟎  
(2.30b) 
For the TE mode: 
𝒉𝟎= 𝐶𝟐𝛁𝑇𝒆 
(2.31a) 
 𝒆𝟎= 𝐶𝟏(𝒖𝒛 × 𝛁𝑇𝒆) 
(2.31b) 
and for the TM mode: 
𝒉𝟎=  𝑗𝜔𝜀𝐶𝟐(𝛁𝑇𝒎× 𝒖𝒛) 
(2.32a) 
𝒆𝟎= 𝐶𝟏𝛁𝑇𝒎 
(2.32b) 
C1 and C2 are constants. Combining Equation (2.32) with Equations (2.26) through 
(2.29) and assuming harmonic time dependence one gets  
𝑗𝜔𝜇𝐿(𝑧)
(2.33a) 
𝑑𝐿(𝑧)
(2.33b) 
Note that v and i represent the voltages and currents of the particular propagating 
mode under specified boundary conditions. It is assumed that the product (𝑣∙𝑖∗) is 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

proportional to power flow of the mode and the ratio 
𝑖  = 𝑍 is the impedance of the 
mode. We can define the power in the usual way for electric circuits as 𝑃=
2 𝑅𝑒(𝑣∙𝑖∗) . 
This definition of the power imposes the condition that only one of the constants C1 
and C2 is arbitrary. The arbitrary constant is obtained from additional requirements 
representing normalization conditions, which are usually chosen such that the fields 
do not contradict basic physics. In the case of lines such as coaxial cables that have a 
principal mode, the transverse electric field obeys the Laplace equation. Therefore, one 
can integrate along the path between the electrodes to obtain the voltage between 
them. This defines uniquely the outstanding, arbitrary constant. The interested reader 
can find further details in References [2], [5], and [7] – [11].   
With i and v defined, we can now define the characteristic impedance of the mode. 
Begin with the following relation between the transverse field components  
𝒖𝑧× 𝑯𝑡= 𝒖𝒛 × 𝑖𝐶𝟐𝜵𝑇𝒆= 
𝑣𝐶1 𝑬𝑡= 
𝐶𝟏𝑍𝑬𝑡 . 
(2.34) 
For a TE mode propagating in air, it can be shown that  
𝐶2 𝑍= 𝑍0𝑇𝐸= (
𝜖0)1/2 𝜆𝑔
(2.35) 
where Z0TE is the characteristic impedance of the TE mode, and 𝜆0 is the free space 
wavelength. The characteristic impedance of the TM mode can be found in a similar 
way [12] 
𝑍0𝑇𝑀= (
𝜖0)1/2 𝜆0
(2.36) 
Note that this definition of the characteristic impedance is not unique. It is not possible 
to uniquely define the characteristic impedance of the guided wave in general, but this 
definition is a reasonable one. 
Finally, for completeness, it necessary to describe power flow in a guided-wave 
configuration. For electromagnetic fields the power flow is represented by Poynting’s 
vector 
𝑺= 𝑬 × 𝑯 
(2.37) 
In a guided-wave structure, the power flow is obtained by integrating the normal 
component of the Poynting vector over the waveguide cross section. Up to now, we used 
a general approach that depends on the solution of a boundary value problem of 
arbitrary configuration. It has allowed us to introduce the concepts of currents and 
voltages in a general sense for the transverse components of an arbitrary guided-wave 
field configuration, paving the way for the introduction of transmission line theory. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2.3 Transmission line theory 
Although the theory of guided electromagnetic waves can be fully developed from 
Maxwell’s equations, the concepts of electrical circuits, including both lumped-element 
and distributed circuits, are widely used in microwave engineering.  If the 
electromagnetic problem can be reduced to the propagation of a TEM wave, the circuit 
representation provides utility and fundamental insight. TEM-like waves are the 
principal modes of widely-used waveguides such as coaxial cables, microstrip lines, and 
coplanar waveguides. Here we will use the framework of circuit theory to introduce 
transmission line theory along with many key terms and concepts used throughout this 
book. 
We will follow an approach introduced in the early stages of the development of 
microwave electronics [12]. Transmission line theory was originally developed by 
Heaviside [13] and the interested reader can find further details in a number of texts 
[14] – [17].  Having introduced current i and voltage v, propagation of a TEM mode in 
one direction is reduced to the propagation of a voltage or current wave on a 
transmission line of a finite length l. Note that in the context of microwave metrology, 
the transmission line concept is advantageous over pure circuit theory as it allows for 
easier definition of measurement reference planes. 
Figure 2.1. Transmission line model. A schematic of a segment of a transmission 
line. The line of infinitesimal length dz is characterized by per-unit-length electrical 
circuit elements: resistance R0, inductance L0, capacitance C0 and conductance G0. 
A transmission line is characterized by per-unit-length electrical circuit elements: 
resistance R0, inductance L0, capacitance C0 and conductance G0 as shown in Fig. 2.1. 
These parameters depend on transmission line dimensions and the materials used to 
construct the line. Applying Kirchoff’s laws for this infinitesimally long element yields 
the Telegrapher’s equations: 
𝑑𝑉(𝑧)
= −(𝑅0 + 𝑗𝜔𝐿0)𝐼(𝑧) 
(2.38a) 
𝑑𝐼(𝑧)
𝑑𝑧= −(𝑅0 + 𝑗𝜔𝐿0)𝑉(𝑧) 
(2.38b) 
We use the capital italicized letters I and V to represent the current i and voltage v 
with assumed harmonic time dependence. Taking the expression for I(z) from (2.38b) 
and inserting into (2.38a) gives the wave equation for voltage. The wave equation for 
current can be obtained in a similar way. The solution of this wave equation is in the 
form (2.29), but with L(z) replaced by voltage V(z):  
𝑉(𝑧) = 𝑉+ 𝑒−𝛾𝑧+ 𝑉−𝑒𝛾𝑧 
(2.39) 
As in (2.29), the solution is a superposition of forward-propagating wave (from the 
source) and backward-propagating wave (from the load). Unique values of V+ and V_ 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

are obtained from the voltage and current and the load impedance at the end of the 
transmission line. If the transmission line of length l is terminated by a load impedance 
ZL and we move the origin of the coordinate system there, then the expression 𝑉+𝑒−𝛾𝑙 
represents the voltage wave incident on the load and  𝑉−𝑒𝛾𝑙 represents the voltage wave 
propagating away from this load. 
The propagation constant and characteristic impedance of the transmission line are 
functions of the per-unit-length circuit elements: 
 𝛾= [(𝑅0 + 𝑗𝜔𝐿0) ∙(𝐺0 + 𝑗𝜔𝐶0)]1/2   
(2.40) 
𝑍0 = √
(𝑅0+𝑗𝜔𝐿0)
(𝐺0+𝑗𝜔𝐶0)  
(2.41) 
respectively. From (2.38a) and (2.39), the current is  
𝐼(𝑧) =
(𝑅0+𝑗𝜔𝐿0) (𝑉+𝑒−𝛾𝑧− 𝑉−𝑒𝛾𝑧) =
𝑍0 (𝑉+𝑒−𝛾𝑧− 𝑉−𝑒𝛾𝑧) 
(2.42) 
We assume that the voltage (V2) and current (I2) at the load are known and define them 
 𝑉2 = 𝑍𝐿𝐼2 
(2.43) 
where ZL is the load impedance. The boundary conditions for obtaining the amplitudes 
of the forward and backward waves become 
𝑉(𝑙) = 𝑉2  = 𝑉+ 𝑒−𝛾𝑙+ 𝑉−𝑒𝛾𝑙  
(2.44) 
𝐼(𝑙) = 𝐼2 =
𝑍0 (𝑉+𝑒−𝛾𝑙− 𝑉−𝑒𝛾𝑙) 
(2.45) 
The solution of these two equations for V+ and V- gives  
𝑉+ =
2 (𝑉2 + 𝑍0𝐼2)𝑒𝛾𝑙= 𝑉+𝑒𝛾𝑙  
(2.46a)  
2 (𝑉2 −𝑍0𝐼2)𝑒−𝛾𝑙= 𝑉−𝑒−𝛾𝑙 
(2.46b) 
Inserting (2.46) into (2.39) and (2.42) and rearranging terms yields 
𝑉(𝑧) =
𝑉2+𝑍0𝐼2
𝑒𝛾(𝑙−𝑧) +
𝑉2−𝑍0𝐼2
𝑒−𝛾(𝑙−𝑧) = 𝑉𝐹𝑊(𝑧) + 𝑉𝐵𝑊(𝑧) = 𝑉2 cosh 𝛾(𝑙−𝑧) +
𝑍0𝐼2sinh 𝛾(𝑙−𝑧) 
(2.47) 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

𝐼(𝑧) =
𝑉2+𝑍0𝐼2
𝑒𝛾(𝑙−𝑧) − 
𝑉2−𝑍0𝐼2
𝑒−𝛾(𝑙−𝑧) = 𝐼𝐹𝑊(𝑧) − 𝐼𝐵𝑊(𝑧) = 𝐼2 cosh(𝑙−𝑧) −
𝑍0 sinh 𝛾(𝑙−𝑧)
(2.48) 
Equations (2.47) and (2.48) give the forward and backward propagating voltage and 
current waves – VFW, VBW, IFW, and IBW – as functions of V2 and I2.  
In practice, it is useful to know the ratio of the backward propagating wave to the 
forward propagating wave. This ratio reveals what fraction of the wave is reflected 
backward as a function of the load impedance or other inhomogeneity in the 
transmission line. This ratio is called reflection coefficient Γ and it can be expressed at 
any position z along the transmission line as  
Γ(𝑧) =
𝑉𝐹𝑊=
𝑉2−𝑍0𝐼2
𝑉2+𝑍0𝐼2 𝑒−2𝛾(𝑙−𝑧) =
𝑍𝐿−𝑍0
𝑍𝐿+𝑍0 𝑒−𝛾(𝑙−𝑧) 
(2.49) 
The impedance Z at any position along the transmission line is given by 
𝑍(𝑧) =
𝑉(𝑧)
𝐼(𝑧) = 𝑍0
(𝑍𝐿+𝑍0)𝑒𝛾(𝑙−𝑧)+(𝑍𝐿−𝑍0)𝑒−𝛾(𝑙−𝑧)
(𝑍𝐿+𝑍0)𝑒𝛾(𝑙−𝑧)−(𝑍𝐿−𝑍0)𝑒−𝛾(𝑙−𝑧)=𝑍0
1+Γ(𝑧)
1−Γ(𝑧)  
(2.50) 
 Evaluating Equation (2.49) at the position z  = l yields:  
𝑍𝐿−𝑍0
𝑍𝐿+𝑍0  
(2.51) 
This equation can be graphically represented by use of a Smith chart (or Smith 
diagram). The Smith chart visualizes the magnitude and phase of the reflection 
coefficient as a function of the load impedance. More generally, the Smith chart may 
be used to plot the reflection coefficient as a function of position along a transmission 
line or as a function of frequency. Several simple examples of impedance values are 
graphed on a Smith chart in Fig. 2.2. The radius of the chart is equal to one, 
representing full reflection of an incident signal. Thus, the position corresponding to 
an open circuit lies on the real axis with a value equal to positive one. The reflection 
coefficient of a short circuit is 180 degrees out of phase from the open-circuit reflection 
and therefore its position on the Smith chart is also on the real axis, but with a value 
equal to negative one. For an impedance-matched load, the reflection coefficient is 
equal to zero and therefore the position of the matched impedance in the Smith chart 
is at the center. Usually the reflection coefficient is frequency- and position-dependent. 
Therefore, the impedance change along the transmission line at a given fixed frequency 
may be represented by a parametric curve with distance from the beginning or end of 
the transmission line as a parameter. Likewise, for a fixed position on a transmission 
line, the frequency dependence of the impedance may be represented by a similar 
curve. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Figure 2.2. The Smith chart. The positions of several possible loads are shown: an 
open circuit, a short circuit and a matched load Z0. Examples of a constant resistance 
curve and a constant reactance curve are shown in gray. 
Finally, an understanding of the power transmitted through a transmission line is of 
fundamental importance because it allows a unique definition of the relationship 
between the currents and voltages on the transmission line. Under the assumption of 
harmonic time dependence, the power transmitted through the cross section of a 
transmission line at position z = z1 along the transmission line is 
2 𝑅𝑒(𝑉(𝑧1)𝐼∗(𝑧1)) 
(2.52) 
where the asterisk denotes the complex conjugate. Using the previously introduced 
forward and backward waves this can be rewritten as 
2 𝑅𝑒{𝑉𝐹𝑊(𝑧1)𝐼𝐹𝑊
∗(𝑧1) −𝑉𝐵𝑊(𝑧1)𝐼𝐵𝑊
(𝑧1) + (𝑉𝐵𝑊(𝑧1)𝐼𝐹𝑊
∗(𝑧1) −𝑉𝐹𝑊(𝑧1)𝐼𝐵𝑊
(𝑧1))} . 
(2.53) 
It follows that the power transmitted through a transmission line is not simply the 
difference of the power transmitted by the forward and backward waves, but also 
includes the interaction of these waves on the transmission line. This result is not 
surprising since the superposition principle applies only to voltages and currents (in 
linear circuits), but not to power. 
2.4 Impedance, admittance and scattering matrixes 
From basic circuit theory one can write equations that describe the relationships 
between the voltages and currents at each port of a multiport device. In order to 
calibrate and analyze the microwave measurements it is useful to describe these 
relationships in terms of impedance, admittance, and scattering parameters. Here, we 
will develop this approach for a two port configuration, but the approach can be 
generalized to any number of ports. Following convention, we introduce the currents 
at port 1 (I1) and port 2 (I2) and the corresponding voltages (V1 and V2) as shown in Fig. 
2.3.  If the network is linear, then the voltages will be linear functions of currents:  
𝑉1 = 𝑍11𝐼1 + 𝑍12𝐼2 
(2.54a)  
𝑉2 = 𝑍21𝐼1 + 𝑍22𝐼2 
(2.54b) 
where the variables Zij have the units of impedance and collectively form an impedance 
matrix. From the reciprocity principle for passive linear circuits, it follows that 𝑍12 =
𝑍21. Alternative representations may be developed by choosing variables other than V1 
and V2 to be the dependent independent variables. For example, equations could be 
written for I1 and I2 as functions of V1 and V2 with the matrix of corresponding 
coefficients representing admittances. As yet another alternative, the so-called “h-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

matrix representation,” equations could be written with the input voltage and the 
output current as the dependent variables. 
Figure 2.3. A two-port device. A schematic of a two-port device defines the currents 
(I1 and I2), voltages (V1 and V2), and power waves (a1, a2, b1, b2).  
At microwave frequencies, it is extremely difficult to directly measure voltages and 
currents. Therefore, a different approach had to be introduced that is more suitable for 
metrology at these frequencies. Assume that a two-port device is inserted (embedded) 
into a transmission line. We will call this device the device under test or DUT. Recall 
from Equations (2.46) that the voltages and currents at a port can be expressed as a 
superposition of waves propagating toward and away from the port. Here, the 
amplitudes of the of waves propagating towards and away from a given port n are 𝑉𝑛+ 
and 𝑉𝑛−. We can express the amplitudes of the waves propagating away from the port 
as functions of the amplitudes of the waves propagating towards the port n. 
Specifically, for a linear, two-port DUT: 
𝑉1−= 𝑆11𝑉1+ + 𝑆12𝑉2+  
(2.55a)  
𝑉2−= 𝑆21𝑉1+ + 𝑆22𝑉2+  
(2.55b) 
The coefficients Sij are called scattering parameters and collectively form a scattering 
matrix. The scattering matrix relates the waves reflected or scattered from the network 
to those incident upon the network. The scattering matrix parameters are sometimes 
referred to as “S parameters.” In a two-port device, the physical meaning of S11 is the 
input reflection coefficient when the output is matched (𝑉2+ = 0), S21 is the forward 
transmission from port 1 to port 2, S12 is the reverse transmission from port 2 to port 
1, and S22 is the reflection coefficient at port 2. An n × n matrix for an n-port device is 
considered reciprocal when Sij  =  Sji and symmetric if  it is reciprocal and Sii  =  Sjj for 
all values of i and j. 
In commercial test equipment such as vector network analyzers, the scattering matrix 
parameters are usually normalized following the procedure introduced in Reference 
[18], in which the waves are defined in terms of the complex amplitudes of the incident 
and reflected power waves. This was done to make their definition consistent with the 
conservation of energy. Voltage amplitudes, on the other hand, have to be normalized 
to an arbitrary reference impedance. Usually, the characteristic impedance of the line 
is used as the normalization constant. Note that the characteristic impedance for each 
port, Z0n, can differ from port to port. By convention, the reference impedance is 50 Ω 
for most commercial test equipment. The power waves have amplitudes an and bn, 
which are related to the voltage amplitudes introduced in (2.46) as follows: 
𝑉𝑛+𝑍0𝑛𝐼𝑛
2√|𝑅𝑒(𝑍𝑜𝑛)| =
√|𝑅𝑒(𝑍𝑜𝑛)| ;   
(2.56a) 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

𝑉𝑛−𝑍0𝑛𝐼𝑛
2√|𝑅𝑒(𝑍𝑜𝑛)| = 
√|𝑅𝑒(𝑍𝑜𝑛)| 
(2.56b) 
Note that the amplitudes have the dimension of square root of power. From these 
definitions, the relation between the port voltages and currents for port n and the 
power waves is: 
𝑉𝑛= √|𝑅𝑒(𝑍𝑜𝑛)|(𝑎𝑛+ 𝑏𝑛) 
(2.57a) 
√|𝑅𝑒(𝑍𝑜𝑛)| (𝑎𝑛− 𝑏𝑛) 
(2.57b) 
A set of equations analogous to (2.55) expressed in terms of the two-port power waves 
a and b can be obtained: 
𝑏1 = 𝑆11𝑎1 + 𝑆12𝑎2 
(2.58a)  
𝑏2 = 𝑆21𝑎1 + 𝑆22𝑎2 
(2.58b) 
In terms of the power waves, the incident power into port n is 
2 (𝑎𝑛𝑎𝑛∗−𝑏𝑛𝑏𝑛∗)  
(2.59) 
It is important to remember that the scattering matrix is well-defined only if all ports 
are matched, though Z0n and thus the matching condition may generally vary from port 
to port. In practice, the scattering matrix formulation is convenient for measurements 
as well as simulations. Therefore, microwave network analyzers are designed to 
measure scattering parameters. 
In order to perform meaningful, quantitative measurements, it is necessary to define 
reference planes. When a two-port DUT is embedded into a transmission line, one may 
define specific reference planes at the ports of the device. Sometimes it is not possible 
to measure the response of the DUT at these reference planes. In that case, one has to 
do measurements at different, accessible planes and then translate them to the ports 
of the DUT. Fortunately, the scattering matrix formulation is amenable to the 
translation of the reference planes within a DUT. If the distance between the new 
reference plane to port 1 of the device is l1 and the distance to port 2 is l2 then the 
relation between the scattering matrix measured at the reference plane S and the 
translated scattering matrix S’ at the reference plane of the DUT are expressed as: 
[𝑆′] = [𝑒−𝛾1𝑙1
𝑒−𝛾2𝑙2] [𝑆] [𝑒−𝛾1𝑙1
𝑒−𝛾2𝑙2] 
(2.60) 
Despite these advantages, there are applications where the S parameter 
representation is not optimal. For example, the scattering matrix representation is 
inconvenient for cascading multiple devices. Cascading of matrices is more easily 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

accomplished by converting the scattering matrix parameters to transfer matrix 
parameters Tij: 
𝑎1] = [𝑇11
𝑇22] ∙[𝑎2
𝑏2] = [
𝑆12 −
𝑆22𝑆11
] ∙[𝑎2
.  (2.61) 
The transfer matrix parameters are sometimes referred to as “T parameters.”  The 
Interested reader can find other useful matrix transformation in Reference [8].  
2.5 Signal flow graphs 
Sometimes, it is useful to represent a system of linear equations in a graphical form. 
In the context of RF and microwave calibration procedures, this approach is 
particularly useful for the development of error models and error corrections, as we 
will see below. Here, we briefly review the basic principles. The system of linear 
equations to be represented by this graphical approach has the general form [19], [20] 
𝒚= [𝑴]𝒙+ [𝑴′]𝒚 
(2.62) 
where [M] and [M’’] are square matrices with n columns and rows, the vector x 
represents the n independent variables and the vector y the n dependent variables. 
This system of equations is quite general and can be applied to many systems, 
including circuits with closed signal loops. If there are no direct signal loops, Equation 
(2.62) simplifies to the standard scattering matrix Equations (2.55). A signal flow 
graph consists of a set of nodes that are connected by branches. Each pair of nodes 
represents the amplitudes of an incident and an exciting wave: an “a” and a “b”, as 
defined in (2.56). The branches represent the complex S parameters that relate the 
wave amplitudes. In other words, they represent the gains or losses along the path 
between two nodes. Note that the branches have a specified direction, denoted by an 
arrow, and that signals propagate only in the direction of arrows. For example, if a port 
is terminated by a load, then the corresponding pair of nodes is connected via an 
additional branch, with the load branch corresponding to the reflection coefficient of 
the load. 
The transfer function of a signal flow graph may generally be determined by 
application of the so-called “Mason’s rules.” It is often helpful to simplify the graph by 
use of four simple rules that govern the algebra of signal flow graphs: 
1) Series rule: Two sections in series can be reduced to one with the resulting gain 
given by multiplication of the two S parameters. (see Fig. 2.4(a))  
2) Parallel rule: Two branches in parallel pointing into the same node can be 
replaced by one with the gain equal to the sum of the two S parameters, or, 
more generally, the S parameters of all branches entering a node may be 
summed.  (see Fig. 2.4(b)) 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

3) Loop/self-loop rule: Branches that begin and end at the same node are “self-
loops.” A self-loop can be eliminated by multiplying all branches feeding the 
self-loop node by 1 (1 −𝑆𝑠𝑙)
 where Ssl is the gain of the self-loop. (Fig. 2.4(c)) 
4) Splitting rule: If a node has exactly one incident branch and one or more exiting 
branches, the incoming branch can be “split” and directly combined with each 
of the exiting branches. This rule can be used to treat the loops (arrows in 
parallel branches point to different directions). (Fig. 2.4(d)) 
With experience, one can learn when it is most advantageous to use the signal flow 
graph approach and when it is more advantageous to use a matrix formulation. 
Figure 2.4. Rules for simplifying signal flow graphs. (a) Series rule (b) Parallel 
rule (c) Loop / self-loop rule (d) Splitting rule. 
2.6 Device de-embedding and calibration 
2.6.1 De-embedding 
A central topic of this book is the measurement of nanoscale devices at radio 
frequencies.  Many nanoscale device measurements are implemented as one- or two-
port scattering parameter measurements with a vector network analyzer (VNA). As a 
result, we will focus on de-embedding of devices, calibration techniques and simple 
error models for such measurements. Nanoscale devices are generally integrated with 
a larger test structure that includes host structures, probes, connectors, and contacts. 
We will refer to such blocks of elements external to the nanoscale DUT as test fixtures. 
VNA measurements are usually done at reference planes that includes both the fixture 
and the DUT, which we will refer to as the “coaxial reference plane,” as this reference 
plane often coincides with a coaxial connector. To be able to accurately characterize the 
DUT, one needs to remove the test fixture characteristics from the measurements. 
Broadly speaking, there are many different approaches for removing the effects of the 
fixtures. Fundamentally, each of these approaches may be classified either as a “direct 
measurement” or as a “de-embedding”. In the first case there are two stages. First a 
series of measurements of are made with physical reference standards inserted into 
the fixture in place of the DUT. Subsequently direct measurement of the DUT is 
performed. The reference planes are positioned at the boundary of the fixture and DUT. 
This approach requires development of specialized physical reference standards. As a 
result, the precision of direct measurement results depends on the quality of these 
physical standards. 
 By contrast, a de-embedding procedure uses models of test fixtures. These models are 
either mathematical or obtained experimentally, especially in the case on-wafer 
measurements, which are discussed below. Using these models, we can analytically 
remove the fixtures from the measurement. The precision of this approach depends 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

once again on the accuracy of the model used. We will use both the direct measurement 
and de-embedding approaches throughout this book. 
The concept of scattering parameters together with the flow graph approach is 
especially useful for the development of the theory of de-embedding fixtures from the 
measurements. Fig. 2.5 shows the signal flow graph for a two-port fixtured 
measurement with both the fixtures and the DUT represented by S parameters. The 
outer and inner pairs of dashed lines represent the coaxial and DUT reference planes, 
respectively. The properties of the two test fixtures are describe by the scattering 
parameter matrix elements SFAij and SFBij. 
Figure 2.5. A fixtured, two-port measurement. The properties of the DUT are 
represented by S parameter matrix elements Sij. The properties of the two fixtures are 
represented by S parameter matrix elements SFAij and SFBij. The four grey, dashed lines 
represent reference planes. The outer pair represent the coaxial reference planes while 
the inner pair represent DUT reference planes. 
Matrix algebra provides the simplest approach to de-embed the scattering parameters 
of the DUT from the measurements. First, one needs to convert the S parameter 
matrices of the measurement, both test fixtures and the DUT to T-parameter matrices 
using (2.46). Then  
𝑻𝒎= 𝑻𝑭𝑨 𝑻𝑫𝑼𝑻 𝑻𝑭𝑩 
(2.63) 
where Tm is the T matrix from the VNA measurements, and TFA, TFB, and TDUT are the 
T matrices for fixture A, fixture B, and the DUT, respectively. Multiplying by the 
inverse T matrices of fixtures yields 
𝑻𝑫𝑼𝑻= [𝑻𝑭𝑨]−1𝑻𝒎[𝑻𝑭𝑩]−1 
(2.64) 
The S parameters of the device are then obtained by converting TDUT back to an S 
parameter matrix.   
2.6.2 Multiline TRL and other calibration techniques 
 In general, there is no “ideal” measurement test equipment. Therefore, the 
measurement strategy is to evaluate deviations from ideal behavior and to remove 
these systematic deviations from the measurements through calibration, thus 
significantly improving the accuracy of network analyzer measurements. This in turn 
provides the most accurate picture of device performance. 
Many approaches have been developed for calibrated scattering parameter 
measurements. Detailed descriptions of coaxial-plane calibration techniques can be 
found in manufacturers’ applications notes [21] – [23] as well as published papers [24] 
– [26]. Many of these approaches were initially developed for a coaxial environment, 
but have since been adapted to the on-wafer environment. In this book, considerable 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

use is made of the multiline thru-reflect-line (TRL) calibration procedure and therefore 
we will often focus on that approach. Multiline TRL offers a high degree of precision 
and utilizes an easily-implemented set of calibration standards, however many 
alternative calibration techniques exist. For example, the short-open-line-thru (SOLT) 
calibration, for example, utilizes symmetric open lines, symmetric shorted lines, a line 
of known length and a thru line that is short enough that one can assume that the 
transmission is unity. Another possibility is the line-reflect-match (LRM) calibration, 
which supplements the SOLT calibration with a symmetric 50 ohm load. There is one 
important limitation all these standard calibration procedures have in common: they 
are valid only under the assumption that the waves represent a single propagating 
mode within the calibration standard and the DUT. If this condition is not satisfied, a 
multimode calibration procedure must be introduced.  
Returning to the TRL calibration procedure, it is useful to describe the general 
principles and implementation of the multiline TRL calibration before discussing the 
specific case of on-wafer multiline TRL. The TRL calibration procedure was originally 
introduced in [24] for calibration of dual six-port network analyzers, but is commonly 
used in conventional VNA calibrations. For calibration of two port VNA measurements, 
it is convenient to introduce the concept of error boxes that describe deviations of the 
VNA from ideal behavior. In this model, incident (outgoing) waves going in to (out of) 
the ideal VNA are entering (exiting) the error boxes at some fictitious reference planes. 
This approach is justified because the four port reflectometers of the network analyzer 
can be reduced to a cascade of two port equations [25]. For a two-port measurement, 
the error boxes take the form a two by two matrix. In turn, the calibration problem 
takes a form similar to Equations (2.48) and (2.64), where the fixture matrices are 
replaced by error boxes. In contrast to the fixture matrices, the error boxes do not in 
general satisfy the reciprocity requirement. The error boxes may be determined by 
solving a set of equations for set calibration standards, each of which is in the form of 
(2.55).  
As originally conceived, three calibration standards were used in the TRL calibration. 
First, a “thru” standard was established by directly connecting ports 1 and 2 at the 
coaxial reference planes (the outer pair of reference planes in Fig. 2.5). Second, each 
port is terminated at the coaxial reference planes by a short circuit, open circuit or any 
impedance that has a load out of center of the Smith chart and is the same for both 
ports. The third standard is established by connecting a line of a known length between 
the coaxial reference planes. Note that this line has a different length than the thru 
line. 
Early implementations of TRL faced a number of difficulties that were ultimately 
overcome by extending the technique by use of multiple, redundant lines. For instance, 
early implementations of TRL were band limited due to fact that the line length had 
to differ from /2, where  is the wavelength of the source signal. For broadband 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

measurements, additional lines had to be introduced, but this approach introduced 
continuity problems at the boundaries of the frequency bands. Further, the approach 
did not take advantage of the fact that multiple lines provided redundant 
measurements that could potentially reduce measurement errors. These problems 
were ultimately solved by Bianco et al. [27] and Marks [26], who utilized multiple 
redundant line standards in the TRL calibration procedure, culminating in the 
technique we now know as multiline TRL. In multiline TRL, the calibration standards 
consist of set of transmission lines that differ only in length, the shortest of which 
serves as the thru standard, as well as reflection standards, which are assumed to be 
the same for both port connections. The procedure is based on estimation of the 
propagation constant of the transmission line standards at each measured frequency. 
Then the S-parameter correction coefficients are calculated using the accurate 
estimate of the propagation constant. The multiline TRL approach may be represented 
by an error box formulation as shown in Fig. 2.6. 
Figure 2.6. Two-port, eight-term error model. The S parameters of the DUT are Sij 
and the eight error terms are eij. 
Importantly, the so called “switch terms” must be measured in addition to the 
calibration standards. The switch terms are specific to a given network analyzer, and 
account for differences between the forward and reverse match conditions. The switch 
terms can be measured only if all four wave parameters are accessible via the 
measurement instrument. Typically, the switch terms are measured simultaneously 
with the thru standard. The forward (Γ𝐹𝑊) and reverse (Γ𝑅) switch terms are defined as 
Γ𝐹𝑊= 
𝑏2𝑚|
𝑆𝑜𝑢𝑟𝑐𝑒=𝑃𝑜𝑟𝑡1
; Γ𝑅= 
𝑏1𝑚|
𝑆𝑜𝑢𝑟𝑐𝑒=𝑃𝑜𝑟𝑡2
(2.65) 
Multiline TRL is in general done in two steps. In the first step, the propagation 
constant and line corrections are obtained. In the second step, the corrected lines are 
used to get the error box parameters. This is accomplished by analytically solving the 
eigenvalue problem following from the cascaded ports in Fig. 2.6. Several software 
packages are available for this calibration, including the NISTcal and STATISTIcal 
among other programs.  
Note that while the S-parameters are defined relative to the characteristic impedance 
of the transmission line standards, Z0, multiline TRL obtains the propagation constant 
and the correction parameters without knowledge of the characteristic impedance. 
Once Z0 is ultimately known, the correction coefficients can be transformed to any 
reference impedance. In addition, it is useful to know the length of the calibration lines 
or at minimum their relative length differences. This enables the selection of line pairs 
at each frequency that in turn avoids singularities in the calculation and improves the 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

accuracy of the propagation constant and error box parameters by averaging the 
results from the line pairs.   
2.6.3 On-wafer calibration 
Now we turn to on-wafer calibration procedures. Many nanoscale devices are 
incorporated into “on-chip” or “on-wafer” devices. Thus, we will introduce the basic 
concepts of on-wafer calibration and discuss some of the simpler error correction 
schemes. Our discussion in this chapter will be limited to the extension of multiline 
TRL to an on-wafer environment. In Chapter 4, on-wafer measurement 
instrumentation and other practical considerations are discussed and in Chapter 6, an 
example of a calibrated, on-wafer measurement of a nanowire device is given.  
On-wafer waveguide structures are usually in the form of a microstripline or coplanar 
waveguide. These structures are contacted with a set of specially designed probes. 
During calibration, the probes are treated as part of the test fixture. The tips of the 
probe now define the position of the reference plane that we have up until now referred 
to as the “coaxial” reference plane. For the on-wafer multiline TRL calibration, the 
standards must have the same contact layout and geometry as the “fixture lines” of the 
DUTs. As in the multiline calibration approach described above, we once again obtain 
the propagation constant, the error boxes and the corrected lines and we use the error 
boxes to correct the S-parameters of the DUT. The error boxes include the properties 
of both the probes and the test platform, including the vector network analyzer. As long 
as the connecting transmission lines within the DUT have the same configuration as 
the calibration standards, one can translate the reference planes as described in 
Equation (2.60). Reference plane translation is often utilized in RF nanoelectronic 
devices to move the reference plane position as close as possible to the nanoscale 
building block(s) within the device.  
2.7 Multimode calibration 
A significant limiting factor of standard calibration procedures is that they require 
single-mode propagation at the reference planes. This may not be always the case: 
multimode propagation can easily occur when coupled or multiline waveguides are 
investigated and may occur in some nanoelectronic devices. Therefore, it is important 
to address the more complicated case of calibration when there are multiple modes 
propagating at the reference plans. The philosophy of multimode calibration follows 
basic multiport calibration techniques. Multimode calibration assumes that each mode 
propagates from its own effective port. Under this assumption the problem of 
multimode calibration is recast as a multiport calibration procedure where the number 
of physical ports is multiplied by the number of propagating modes. Instead of solving 
for propagation constants and error boxes at each port, one solves for unique 
propagation constants and error boxes corresponding to each propagating mode. The 
multimode TRL calibration technique was first introduced in Reference [29], but we 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

will follow the approach introduced in Reference [30]. The multimode TRL calibration 
can be divided in three main steps. As in the multiline TRL calibration, the first step 
focuses on determination of the propagation constants of all of the propagating modes 
based on measurements of the thru and line standards. In the second step the error 
box matrices TA, TB are partially determined. In the third step, a reflect measurement 
is used to reduce the number of unknowns in these matrices.  
Here, we will describe the two-port device case, which can be extended to an arbitrary 
number of ports. We introduce the generalized reverse cascade matrix approach, which 
may simplify some problems in which symmetry is present. Such cases are not that 
common generally, but are present in some de-embedding cases that are discussed in 
following chapters. In a generalized scattering matrix of a multimode two-port device, 
all incident waves at port 1, incorporating power waves for N modes, are represented 
by an incident wave vector A1. Similarly, all reflected waves at port 1 are represented 
by the vector B1. The vectors A2 and B2 represent the incident and reflected waves at 
port 2 of the generalized two-port device. The vectors are defined:  
𝑨𝟏= [
; 𝑨𝟐= [
𝑎𝑁+1
(2.66a) 
𝑩𝟏= [
; 𝑩𝟐= [
𝑏𝑁+1
(2.66b)   
This definition enables a scattering matrix definition that includes transmission 
between N modes at port 1 and N modes at port 2. Thus, this definition also includes 
the mixing of the modes from different ports. Further, it can also incorporate 
evanescent modes.  
The generalized scattering matrices are related to the generalized incident and 
reflected wave vectors by 
𝑩𝟐] = [𝑺𝟏𝟏
𝑺𝟐𝟐] [𝑨𝟏
(2.67) 
where Sij are N × N submatrices. In a similar way one can introduce the generalized 
left to right cascade (transmission) matrix  
𝑨𝟐] = [𝑻𝟏𝟏
𝑻𝟐𝟐] [𝑨𝟐
(2.68) 
The conversion between from the generalized scattering matrix to the generalized 
cascade matrix is similar to (2.61) with scalar S parameters replaced by S submatrices. 
This conversion is possible only if S21 is nonsingular. One can also introduce the left-to 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

right reverse cascade matrix (or connected right to left). Simple arithmetic 
manipulation shows that 
𝑨𝟐] = [𝑻̅] [𝑨𝟏
(2.69) 
with the reverse cascade matrix 
𝑻̅ = 𝑷𝑻−𝟏𝑷; 𝑷= [𝟎
(2.70) 
This matrix represents the mirrored (connected right-to-left) version of the original 
left-to right matrix.  P is a 2N x 2N permutation matrix with I a N × N unity matrix. 
In this notation the calibrated two port network analyzer measures the scattering 
parameter matrix M:   
𝑴= 𝑻𝑨𝑻𝑫𝑼𝑻𝑻𝑩
̅̅̅̅ 
(2.71) 
where TDUT is the cascade matrix of the DUT and the matrices TA and TB represent 
the error boxes. With these definitions in place, the multimode calibration procedure 
is analogous to the single-mode case. Specifically, similar calibration standards are 
measured. It is assumed though that these standards can support multiple quasi-TEM 
propagating modes corresponding to the modes supported by the DUT. The complex 
propagation constants of the multiple modes, as well as the matrices TA and TB are 
determined in steps similar to those in the single-mode case. Additional details of the 
procedure can be found in References [29] and [30].  
2.8 Calibration of a scanning microwave microscope and other one-port 
systems 
We conclude this chapter with a specific calibration approach that is important for 
local, near-field probes such as near-field scanning microwave microscopes (NSMMs). 
The calibration of the near-field probing measurements is particularly challenging 
because the condition of single-mode propagation is not satisfied for near fields. 
Fortunately, this problem can be avoided for most NSMM measurements if they are 
done in a single-port configuration, i.e. if the microwave signal path in the NSMM can 
be represented as a one-port network. This is true for the vast majority of existing 
NSMMs that are based on atomic force and scanning tunneling microscope systems. 
For single-port NSMMs the measurand is the complex reflection coefficient S11m. The 
near-field interaction is localized at the tip and thus will be included in the de-
embedded properties of the measured DUT. The effects of near-field interaction cannot 
be removed by calibration. Quantifying and understanding this interaction must be 
done by analyzing and interpreting the calibrated measurement results.  

--- PAGE BREAK ---

In the single-port case the signal flow graph shown in Fig. 2.6 is simplified to the graph 
shown in Fig. 2.7. The terms in Fig. 2.7 are defined as follows: e00 is directivity, the 
product e10e01 is tracking and e11 is the port match [31]. Using the signal flow graph 
rules the relation between the measured and actual reflection coefficients is 
𝑆11𝑚= 𝑒00 + 
𝑒01𝑒10Γ𝐿
1−𝑒11Γ𝐿  
(2.72) 
where ΓL is the de-embedded reflection coefficient of the DUT, as shown in Fig. 2.7. 
From this equation, it follows that to calibrate any one port measurement, including 
one obtained with an NSMM, it is necessary to solve a system of equations for three 
complex values, which requires no fewer than three measurements of calibration 
standards. Specific approaches to NSMM calibration will be discussed in Chapter 7. 
Figure 2.7. Error model for an NSMM and other one port measurements. This 
model includes three error terms: e00 is directivity, the product e10e01 is tracking and e11 
is the port match. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

References 
[1] P. A. Rizzi, Microwave Engineering Passive Circuits (Prentice Hall, 1988) 
[2] R. F. Harrington, Time-harmonic electromagnetic fields (Wiley, 2001). 
[3] O. Keller, Quantum theory of near field electrodynamics (Springer, 2011). 
[4] J. D.Jackson, Classical Electrodynamics (John Wiley 1975).  
[5] J. A. Stratton, Electromagnetic Theory (McGraw Hill, 1941). 
[6] H. Hertz, “Die Kräfte electrischer Schwingungen, behandelt nach Maxwellschen 
Theorie, Ann. Physik, 36 (1888) pp.1-22 
[7] D. M. Kerns, “Plane-wave scattering matrix theory of antennas and antenna-antenna 
interactions,” National Bureau of Standards Monograph 162 (1981). 
[8] D. M. Pozar, Microwave engineering (Wiley, 2004). 
[9] K.C. Gupta, R. Garg, I. Bahl, P. Bhartia, Microstrip lines and slotlines (Artech House, 
1996). 
[10] R.E.Collin Foundations of Microwave Engineering (McGrow Hill, 1992). 
[11] L. D. Landau and E.M. Lifshitz, Classical Theory of Fields (Pergamon Press, 1962).  
[12] J. C. Slater, “Microwave Electronics,” Reviews of Modern Physics 18 (1946) pp. 441-512. 
[13] O. Heaviside, Electromagnetic Theory:complete and unabridged edition v.1 no. 2 and 
v.3, (Dover , 1950).  
[14] A. Sommerfeld, Electrodynamics, (Academic Press,1952). R. J. Collier, Transmission 
lines: equivalent circuits, electromagnetic theory, and photons (Cambridge, 2013),  
[15] F. Olyslager, Electromagnetic waveguides and transmission lines (Oxford, 1999). 
[16] R. A. Chipman, Theory and Problems of Transmission Lines (McGraw-Hill, 1968). 
[17] G. Mathaei, L. Young and E.M.T. Jones,  Microwave Filters, Impedance-Matching 
Networks, and Coupling Structures (Artech House, 1980). 
[18] K. Kurokawa, "Power Waves and the Scattering Matrix", IEEE Transactions on 
Microwave Theory & Techniques, 13 (1965)  pp. 194-202. 
[19] S. J. Mason, “Feedback theory - some properties of signal flow graphs,” Proceedings of 
the IRE 41 (1963) pp. 1144-1156. F. Caspers, “RF Engineering basic concepts: S-
parameters,” arXiv:1201.2346 [physics.acc-ph]. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

[20] S. J. Mason, “Feedback theory - further properties of signal flow graphs,” Proceedings 
of the IRE 44 (1956) pp. 920-926. 
[21] “S-Parameter Design,” Agilent Application Note 154 (Agilent Technologies, 2006). 
[22] “Vector network analyzer primer” Anritsu Application note 11410-00387 (Anritsu 
Company, 2009). 
[23] “Measuring balanced components with Vector Network Analyzer ZVB” Rhode & 
Schwartz Application note 1EZ53_0E (Rhode & Schwartz, 2004). 
[24] G. F. Engen and C. A. Hoer, “Thru-Reflect –Line: an improved technique for calibrating 
a dual six-port automatic network analyzer,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and 
Techniques 27 (1979) pp. 987-993. 
[25] H.-J. Eul and B. Schiek, “A general theory and new calibration procedures for network 
analyzer self-calibration,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques 39 
(1991) p. 724-731. 
[26] R. Marks, “A multiline method of network analyzer calibration,” IEEE Transactions on 
Microwave Theory and Techniques 39 (1991) p. 1205-1215. 
[27] B. Bianco, M. Parodi, S. Ridella, and F. Selvaggi, “Launcher and microstrip 
characterization,” IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement 25 (1976) pp. 
320-323. 
[28] C. Sequinot, P. Kennis, J-F. Legier, F. Huret, E. Paleczny, and L. Hayden, “Multimode 
TRL-New concept in microwave measurements: Theory and experimental verification,” 
IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques 46 (1998) pp. 536. 
[29] M. Wojnowski, V. Issakov, G. Sommer, R. Weige,”Multimode TRL calibration technique 
for characterization of differential devices,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and 
Techniques 60, (2012) pp.2220. 
[30] “De-embedding and embedding S-parameter networks using a vector network 
analyzer,” Agilent Application Note 1364-1 (Agilent/Keysight Technologies, 2004) 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R  dz
L  dz
C  dz
G  dz
I(z)
I(z + dz)
V(z)
V(z + dz)
FIGURE 2-1.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Z  j
-Z  j
Im(Z) = Z  j / 3
Re(Z) = Z  / 3
open
short
FIGURE 2-2.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Device
Under
Test
Port 1
Port 2
FIGURE 2-3.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

S  S
a   b
Sa+Sb
S  S  / (1 - S  )
a   b
FIGURE 2-4.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

PORT1
PORT2
e11 S11
FIGURE 2-6.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

PORT1
FIGURE 2-7.